Am I going to hell?
>> Yes. But here's the thing. Everybody is
going to hell. And it's not because they
don't believe in God. And look, I'm a
historian and a theologian. So, I study
ancient biblical manuscripts. And if you
truly understand what this book is
saying, I don't want you to experience
that.
>> This is not a place I want to go. So,
what do I do about that?
>> It's not about trying to earn my way
into heaven. It's not about checking
off. I read the Bible as many times. I
didn't lie. I didn't steal. I didn't
cheat. Like, it's none of that. But
here's the problem. Unfortunately, we
bought the lie that we are the sum of
our actions, where we're chasing after
things that aren't going to give us what
we actually need. Which is also why we
live in a world that is lacking in
purpose and meaning.
>> But the part that I've always struggled
with is that the answer being religion
as an antidote to that feeling because I
require a really high standard of
evidence because of the way that I am.
>> Well, I think not only can it provide an
antidote, it can provide the antidote.
And I'll explain why. like how can we
trust human accounts of these things and
then how do you take people who agree
that there's clearly something missing
to believing that what's written in the
Bible is the thing that should guide my
life also do you have any doubt oh
especially when there are times of
struggle and pain and suffering like the
whole Epstein thing right now we are
seeing examples of true evil so there
are moments where I think how could
there be a good god however from my
investigation I am convinced beyond a
reasonable doubt that there's actual
evidence for the existence of God the
historical reliability of the Bible and
the philosophical explanations for
meaning and purpose.
>> And what is that?
>> First, we have
>> that is some of the most persuasive
evidence one can receive.
>> Guys, I've got a quick favor to ask you.
We're approaching a significant
subscriber milestone on this show. And
roughly 69% of you that listen and love
this show haven't yet subscribed for
whatever reason. If there was ever a
time for you to do us a favor, if we've
ever done anything for you, given you
value in any way, it is simply hitting
that subscribe button. And it means so
much to myself, but also to my team
because when we hit these milestones, we
go away as a team and celebrate. And
it's the thing, the simple, free, easy
thing you can do to help make this show
a little bit better every single week.
So, that's a favor I would ask you. And
um if you do hit the subscribe button, I
won't let you down and we'll continue to
find small ways to make this whole
production better. Thank you so much for
being part of this journey. Means the
world. And uh yeah, let's do this.
Wesley, I have this fascinating uh graph
in front of me here and it shows several
things that I find to be really really
interesting. One of them is that as of
2024,
the decline of religion has started to
level off and actually increase a little
bit. And now 63% of US adults identify
as Christian, which is roughly 160
million people. In 2025, Bible sales hit
a 21-year high in the United States with
19 million units sold. Weekly Bible
reading amongst US adults has increased
to 42%, which is up 12% since 2024. And
in 2024, Christian and gospel music
streams in the US increased by roughly
20% according to the Washington Times.
Wesley, what is going on in society? If
we zoom out,
>> I think we're in a unique bubble where
we found ourselves in a time frame where
we're connected more than ever. We've
kind of come out of a period of time
where the new atheism is very, very
popular. You had Dawkins, Daniel, uh,
Daniel Dennett, Sam Harris, Christopher
Hitchens, and they made a big impact in
the early 2000s.
>> I think we should probably just give
some color to what new atheism is.
>> Sure. Yeah.
>> I've actually got a graph here, which
I'll throw up on the screen, which shows
the rise and then the the fall of new
atheism, but I was pulled in by new
atheism.
>> And that meant that I, and again, I
should probably preface my beliefs
because people are going to want to know
what my bias is when I'm asking
questions. I grew up in a very Christian
household up until the age of 18. I then
became agnostic/ atheist when I started
consuming a lot of this stuff from
Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris and all
of these people. And then I find myself
at a point now where I'm just
open-minded and curious,
>> but I have lots of questions. Yeah, you
had these individuals who are writing
these very influential works. But I
sometimes wonder whether the new atheism
movement worked a lot more effectively
in print than it did in actual real
life. Like in terms of the practicality
of the application of the things that
were being talked about, especially in
regards to meaning, if you apply ideas
like you being a product of time plus
matter plus chance, what does that
actually give you in terms of the
ultimate identity questions? And so I
think I think that's true in a lot of
circumstances where you have these seeds
that are planted and they grow and they
produce trees that produce fruit that
are kind of hard to digest in their
actual application. And along with that,
we have a world that's very complex.
We're more connected than we ever have
been. I don't know if we're truly we
were ever truly meant to know as much
information as we do, especially about
things that are going on around the
world and things that are hard to to
comprehend. And so what I think that all
kind of adds up to is people asking
questions about, okay, I'm here. I'm
right now trying to figure out what's
going on. How do I actually find out the
answers to a lot of these questions that
just go beyond the here and the now that
I'm experiencing? This is what um
individuals like James K. Smith called
the dynamics of disenchantment where
people are struggling with these
transcendent questions, questions that
are metaphysical that go beyond just the
here and the now in the world. Why is
the three pounds of gray matter in my
brain able to comprehend the
complexities of the universe? How do I
how do I come up with a solution to that
problem? So, I think that's part of it.
I think it's kind of moving on in a
world that just is probably more messy
than it's ever been. A lot of countries,
the UK, Europe, Canada, America, all of
these western countries,
they they were founded on these
Judeo-Christian ethics of foundations
that come from the Old and the New
Testaments, what we call the Bible. And
a lot of people kind of attempted to
divorce the religious aspect from the
societies. And societies became less and
less overtly religious in those natures.
And then a lot of people saw that their
parents were no longer going to church.
Like the Bible wasn't part of kind of
the household any longer. And I talked
to a lot of young people who look at
that and they say in almost like a
rebellion against their parents, they're
now interested in that. Their parents
rebelled by disassociating from
religion. And now I wonder if there's
part of a rebellion in kind of looking
back and trying to reclaim some of that
religious stuff. I think in part as well
this younger generation, Gen Z's and I
guess to some extent also millennials
have been told to live more
individualistic lives and that's really
been glamorized like be your own boss
and now we work remotely and stand on
your own two feet and we're even seeing
people getting into sort of
relationships later and later in their
lives and having less children. So
they're more it appears people are more
unanchored than they've ever been and
that was to some degree glamorized. Um
but it also appears that when we are
unanch anchored when we don't have
responsibilities or we're not part of
something mental health issues um are
quick quick to follow
>> and for this generation they're
suffering the most with those types of
mental health issues and then one would
assert that they would therefore be
searching more for
>> answers to some of these existential
questions
>> expressive individualism I think it rose
that's the kind of the terminology in
soc in the sociological literature that
they refer to it but I I think you
touched on a good point in that like as
we've removed God, part of the
intellectual light enlightenment was
that we would move away from the
shackles of religiosity and the concept
of a creator and that would lead us into
a utopia. And I think the more and more
we've removed that from society that
hasn't decreased our levels of anxiety
and depression and meaning. I I think
it's increased it.
>> Yeah. And especially celebrity worship,
social media, building a following of
your own like sort of low-key
narcissism.
>> Yeah.
>> Has made us more and more and more and
more important. And that seems to
correlate with worse and worse and worse
mental health when you start to become
more individualistic and think more and
more about yourself
>> and self-importance
>> versus others and a bigger picture.
>> Mhm. I think we were created for
community. I think we are as human
beings a creature that is created for
community ultimately like cards on the
table as a Christian because I believe
we are created in the image of a God who
exists in a set of living loving
relationships like that's what the
trinity is when we talk about that idea
within Christian theology. God exists in
father son and holy spirit. And so being
created in the image of God, part of
that is you are created for
relationship. And so in a society that's
continually removing us, you know, you
need to be an influencer. You're
influencing everybody else.
>> When I think we're not created to be
lone wolves or lone rangers. We're
created to live amongst community and
have that be something that likewise
gives us fulfillment. It's not that
people who are leaders are, you know,
rise to the top are wrong by any
stretch, but in a society where we're
alone together because
we are sitting behind computer screens
>> and we're talking to hundreds of
thousands if not millions of people in
some cases, but but we're secluded.
>> I think that that does something to our
souls because we were made to be in
relationship with other people. I
agree with everything you've said as it
relates to the sort of crisis of meaning
in society and I also agree with many of
your reasons as to why that's occurred.
>> The part that I've always struggled with
is then the answer being Christianity or
any other religion.
>> Sure. I agree with, you know, so many of
the things you've said, but then I my
brain has, I think, especially after the
age of 18 when I started reading about
all this new atheist stuff and these
questions of evil and am I going to hell
and all these other things, I've not
been able to get there.
>> But I'm having this conversation with
you today because I am open-minded and
although I've got like difficult
questions to ask, I'm in pursuit of the
truth, not any particular ideology or
answer. So, how do you take someone like
me who agrees that there's clearly
something missing, who believes that
there's something transcendent? Like,
it'd be a crazy thing to assume that
this is it. I I think
>> Yeah.
>> How do you take them from this position
to
>> believing that what's written in this
book in front of me, the Bible,
>> Yeah.
>> is the thing that should guide my life,
>> right?
>> Because I I like, again, I say I'm going
to say this again, that like
>> I think I require a really high standard
of evidence because of the way that I
am.
>> Yeah. You know, I think there's a
historical case for it which I'm very
much invested in because my training
formerly is in historioggraphy. I study
ancient biblical manuscripts and their
kind of reliability and fidelity over
the last couple of millennia. So looking
at some of those manuscripts that
actually can trace back to the actual
time frame of Jesus and answering
questions like is what we have now what
the original authors wrote back then?
So, I think there's a historical
question to it. And I in my own personal
investigation genuinely think that the
evidence, the publicly available
evidence gets us back to not only the
time frame of Jesus, but to early
eyewitness testimony that proclaims that
this first century Jewish itinerate
rabbi who was walking the dusty streets
of first century made these claims and
then there is sufficient evidence to say
that he predicted his own death and
resurrection and did it. How do I know
Jesus Christ was real? And then how do I
know what's written in that book is real
versus just some guys thousands of years
ago made a book?
>> Yeah. So that is a question of
historical reliability. So there are a
couple different ways we could go about
it. First, we have four biographical
accounts of Jesus's life, which is very
unusual. So we call them the Gospels,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Um those
aren't actually our earliest source
material for the life of Jesus. that
comes in the person of Paul. Paul is
actually writing before the gospel
accounts and he is uh someone who was
hostile originally to the Christian
message and he's persecuting Christians.
He comes along and he has this radical
conversion experience when he's
traveling to Damascus where he says he's
he's literally thrown off a horse. He
hears God's voice and it's Jesus and he
says, "Paul, why are you persecuting
me?" And then he writes these things
about his experience and and then
ultimately goes and connects with the
individuals who are who we call the
disciples who are like this this close
Jesus community and connects with them.
So he's our earliest source but then you
have these gospel accounts these these
biographies and the gospels are
interesting because they fit within the
historical framework of ancient Greco
Roman biography. So let me give you an
example. The most well-known person in
Jesus's day was the emperor. His name is
Tiberius. Tiberius has four biographical
accounts that are written about him.
Valasculus, Casiodio, Sutonius, and
Tacitus.
>> So, these are the four guys. Okay.
>> And what's interesting in sort of a
comparative analysis of Jesus and those
people is that they're all writing
around the same time period. So the
biographies are coming from the first
century for Jesus. They're coming in
this time period where you have an early
eyewitness testimony for the emperor for
the most well-known person in the
ancient world. All of the sources except
for uh Valas Peterculus are coming from
the second century.
>> Val Petculus is coming from the first
century. He's very close to the source,
but he's a paid propagandist. So even
though he's the earliest, he's the least
reliable. And for the gospels that comes
around to the 4th century. So there's a
comparison with the source material for
someone like Jesus even though we really
shouldn't have anything about him
because he's he's kind of a nobody from
nowhere
>> in terms of the Roman Empire and the
grand scheme of things.
>> But we have a phenomenal amount of
source information for his life. I mean,
this is one of the things I discovered
when I went through that new atheist
phase was that really everybody kind of
agrees that there was a guy called Jesus
from Nazareth and that he was a real
historical person.
>> I guess the part in dispute was whether
things like his resurrection actually
happened or whether he was just a
spiritual leader back then like we have
spiritual leaders today. And I think one
of the one of the things that I got
really stuck on when I was reading about
Jesus and the Bible was there appears to
be quite a significant gap between his
life, his death, and then the writings
that go into the Bible. And for me in my
head, I was like, well, if you know,
>> if something happened in my life 50
years ago, I mean, I'm only 33, but if
something happened 50 years ago, I would
not be able to recount it. Frankly, I
can't recount what happened last week
accurately,
>> right?
>> Let alone like decades ago. You've you
must have heard this argument before.
>> Yes.
>> What how do you how do you square the
circle here?
>> So, there are a few things going on.
First, we live in a hyperiterate
culture. We are writing everything down.
The ancient world was far less of a
literate culture. They were an oral
culture. These stories would have been
passed in large groups at at at time
frames, especially if we're talking
about the biographical material of Jesus
is actually written in a closer time
frame than the majority of anyone else.
>> What was that gap?
>> It's it's about 40 to 60 years.
>> So, I really want to I imagine there's
some people listening that have probably
never read the Bible. And I really want
to explain to them like what this book
is in the simplest terms. Can I I can
open your Bible.
>> Yeah, of course. Yeah.
>> So, is there is there like chapters in
here?
>> Yeah. So, the Bible is though we now
have it in one book is 66 books written
over a period of about 1600 years on
three different continents by close to
40 different authors in three different
languages.
>> So, I've just opened your Bible. Y
>> and there's one section that says the
Old Testament. There's another section
section that says the New Testament. M
what am I looking at? Like is this God's
words? Is this a bunch of people's
stories that have been compiled
together? What is the Old Testament?
What's the New Testament? What's the
difference?
>> Yeah. So the Old Testament is the Hebrew
scriptures. So that's the scriptures of
the Jewish people.
>> Okay.
>> So that is uh you know it starts in
what's referred to as the Torah, which
are the first five books or the five
books of Moses. And then that goes in a
time frame all the way up to the period
of the Persians.
>> So that's a certain time frame. Yes. And
they've gone and collected books from
that time frame or writings from that
time frame.
>> Yeah. So the ancient Jewish people had
and remember all of these books they
would have circulated as independent
writings.
>> Okay.
>> So we start to see things like this
happen in the 4th century. Prior to that
everything's in independent scrolls. So
there's an understanding when even you
get them all sort of put in one unit
that would have contained the
scriptures, the word of God more so than
like this is the word of God.
>> The reason why I am unapologetic and
very open about my total naivity is
because often in these conversations
>> you end up kind of preaching to the
choir.
>> Sure.
>> If you know what I mean. And there's a
huge amount of people, especially
younger people that went through that
new atheist movement, were maybe born in
the 2000s that are now 26 years old,
>> that have never read the Bible, have
never even opened one, have no idea what
it is. They just think it's this kind of
like book of stories. Yeah.
>> But these the first um you call these
books, I was thinking of them like
chapters.
>> The first one in the Old Testament is
Genesis.
>> Who wrote Genesis? Was that a guy or was
that God? So the idea is in Christianity
the terminology is what's called verbal
plenary inspiration. So verbal it's
spoken plenary it's like written down
and then inspired. So there are human
authors to all these books.
>> Okay. So humans wrote these chapters but
they were inspired by God.
>> So yes. So the understanding so in the
Bible itself Peter says that men spoke
as they were carried along by the Holy
Spirit. So there's a there's a
historical context to all of these like
the history of this period of time of
the nation of Israel as they were being
led by particular rulers.
>> And where does Jesus show up?
>> Jesus is the New Testament.
>> If someone's never read the Old
Testament, what is that about? It's just
describing the time.
>> It's a bunch of different things. So
different things. It's there's a whole
bunch of genres of literature. So, some
of it is history, some of it is poetry,
some of it is what's called wisdom
literature.
>> And who decided that these it looks like
there's I don't know, it looks like
there's about 40 books in the Old
Testament.
>> Mhm. 39 books that are in the Old
>> Who decided that those were going to be
part of the Old Testament because I'm
sure that there was lots of other
writings at the time that could have
been included.
>> Yeah. So, by the time that Jesus is
around, there's approximately an
agreement of what is considered
scripture
>> by who? by the Jews themselves.
>> So the Jews decided which 38 books to
put in.
>> Yes. So you have conversations by
individuals like there's a guy named
Josephus who is writing at the end of
the first century. Part of what he
argues is that the Jewish people don't
have kind of an innumerable number of
religious texts like the Greeks do. They
have a specific number and he uses this
terminology that they were laid up in
the temple. So the idea is that you know
these are the books they're housed in
the temple and they're a set number and
he gives the number of the same number
of letters in the Hebrew alphabet 22. So
you usually see this 22 or 23 number,
but they group them differently. And he
gives an argument that one of the
reasons that there we can find a
timeline for what the Jews consider
scripture is he says there's nothing
written before Moses and there's not
nothing written after the time of Artis
Xerxes, which is the Persian Empire. So
the book of Esther in the Bible is is
that time period. So though there are
writings after that there's this
agreement that
the voice of God in say the prophets
giving a thus sayaith the Lord statement
like communicating messages to the
people of Israel has ceased but the
Jewish cannon though there's like a
closing of it there's a soft closing
there's an idea that there's going to be
a new covenant God is make going to make
new pro promises with his people and so
there are going to be more writings.
>> Okay. So my understanding of that is
that he made the case that God is no
longer communicating with people to
write these books
>> at least that there was a stop point at
Malachi. So it's sometimes referred to
as the 400 years of silence for that
reason
>> from the point of Jesus's death.
>> Mhm.
>> What book from the New Testament is
written last and how big is that gap?
>> That's a debate.
>> Okay. What's the debate? So the debate
so the the there's it's a question if
John's gospel
>> is written before 70 AD or after 70 AD
and if it's written after 70 AD it's
written in the '9s. So it's written
pretty far afterwards.
>> How many years?
>> So if Jesus dies in 33.
>> Okay. So about 60.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Fine.
>> Yeah. So, so at minimum I I think like
99% of historians, biblical scholars,
classicists would argue that the 27
books of the New Testament are written
in the first century. And so in that
sense, they're in the lifetime of the
eyewitnesses to a certain degree.
>> Mhm.
>> And there's evidence even within some of
the gospels where you have these names
thrown out kind of randomly. And part of
the thinking of that is that this is
like citing your sources. At one point
when Jesus is carrying the cross to
Galatha,
>> he kind of stumbles and they get another
person to carry his cross for a little
bit.
>> And that person is Joseph of Arythea.
Well, one of the gospels names one of
Joseph of Arythea's son by name. And the
thinking is that this is probably
someone who's well known within the
early Jesus community. And the purpose
of naming that person randomly is to say
he's actually well known. Go ask him.
>> I mean logically there's quite a risk of
Chinese whispers to some degree.
>> As you were speaking I was trying to
think about things that I experienced
when I was younger like with my like
grandmother before she passed away and I
was trying to like accurately recount
those memories.
>> Yeah.
>> I was thinking of like going to her
house and then
>> I remember one day she gave me some
money but I can't remember what she gave
it to me for and I can't remember how
much she gave me. I know she put it in a
card and this was only like hm 20 years
ago.
>> Yeah.
>> And so if I was to write about that
today, I would be filling in some some
gaps, especially especially this is the
other thing that I always struggled with
is like especially in a world where we
didn't understand science. Now my
grandmother like put it in a card and it
was like I opened it and the way she did
it was often as a surprise. So in a
world where I like didn't understand
physics or science, I might have
concluded that my mother, my grandmother
did something like magical,
>> you know, at a time when we didn't
understand anything about like really
much about the nature of the universe
and planets and the solar system and
physics.
>> So is that a risk that some of the
things that have been transmuted by God
into this book in front of me are prone
to Chinese whispers and or just like a
lack of understanding about the nature
of the world like the resurrection for
example.
>> Yeah. So this is uh this is in my field
referred to as mythological drift. So
how do we factor in making sure that
mythological drift doesn't happen? I
think there are a couple things related
to what you said. First off, I think I
would be careful in trying to ascribe
the ancient world as being
pres-scientific and therefore largely
say ignorant. I mean, even when the
angel comes to Mary in the gospel story
and says, "You're going to be with
child." Mary's objection to the angel is
a scientific one. I haven't met the
minimum requirements of how babies are
made, therefore I can't be pregnant,
right? So, she's not dumb, right? She's
not just at face value accepting that,
you know, well, I believe in angels and
so, you know, this kind of magic thing
can happen. she's still objecting
scientifically even though she might not
have the terminology to understand like
the complexities of child birth and
embryology and all of that. So I would
say you know this is what uh the writer
CS Lewis calls chronological snobbery
that he says you know we need to be
careful of not to ascribe the ancient
world as being more ignorant and stupid
than than you know just because we are a
product of the enlightenment and we
understand scientific things. Yeah. The
second thing is I think the the Chinese
whispers or the telephone game or
whatever you call it is a good is a good
kind of case study. I think where it
falls short is that if you play the
telephone game, if you play Chinese
whispers, there are rules in order to
corrupt the message. So you have to
whisper, you can only say it once. You
have to do it one person to one person.
In an oral culture, you would have been
hearing these stories constantly. So
when some of these stories are told,
they're being told within a lifetime
where there could have been individuals
who say the story of the feeding of the
5000, that's a lot of people. So there's
a lot of witnesses to this particular
event. So if you're writing this down,
there's an aspect of there are people
out there who could verify what is being
said, at least orally, not necessarily
like literarily. Likewise,
what we have in the gospel accounts,
particularly after Jesus's death, when
the disciples proclaiming his
resurrection, they go back to Jerusalem,
which is the scene of the crime. So,
they go back to the exact place where
Jesus was crucified and start telling
people he was risen from the dead. If
there is some aspect of say
disingenuousness and making up a story,
don't go back to the place where
everybody could have seen that thing
happen to that degree. Right? So in in
one sense, Chinese whispers is is a
faulty analogy in that it's less like
one person whispering into another's ear
and more like a 100 people in a room all
saying communicating the thing verbally
and then getting the other people to
repeat it back to them and then
corroborating with the other individuals
of what's going on. Now I think there I
think your point in in the story of your
your grandmother and you know the the
the letter and is a good one. You know
how do we remember things? Do you
remember 9/11?
>> Yes, I do. Yes. And I was in the the UK
at the time.
>> Could you tell me a little bit more
vividly what what you were doing on 911
compared to your grandmother and the
letter?
>> Yes, I could. Yeah. I remember coming
home from school and like watching it on
the screen and my and my dad having it
on the screen and usual just looking at
the screen.
>> Yeah, me too. So whereas I couldn't tell
you much of what else happened during an
average day in that year, I could tell
you what happened on September 11th,
2001. And that's because of the nature
of what was going on. And I think when
we're talking about the gospel stories
in particular, first you have what I
genuinely believe are eyewitness
accounts from at least the source
information coming from a group who
would have heard Jesus be preaching
these things multiple times in multiple
different settings. Like it's it's
probably likely myself as an itinerate I
have given the same talk on a particular
subject quite a few times. Yeah. And I
joke with my wife that she could give my
talk on the historical reliability of
the Bible herself. You know, if I'm
sick, I'll just send my wife, right? Cuz
she's heard it so many times. I think
that's the case that's going on with the
disciples.
>> There's an aspect of they would have
heard say the biatitudes.
>> Yeah.
>> That Jesus most likely more than once is
the case because that's just the nature
of not just itinerate speaking but even
traveling rabbis in in the ancient
world. And then you have this event that
is kind of earthshattering in terms of
their narrative of who they are. They've
been traveling with this rabbi for 3
years straight. They've been hearing his
teaching. They've been seeing miracles
at least that are recorded in the
gospels.
Pretty phenomenal things. And then he
gets taken and he's murdered publicly.
And they think it's over. They think,
you know, there are other messianic
movements in the ancient world. most of
which you and I aren't hearing on a
regular basis because when those
individuals die, their movement dies
with them. And so that's what they think
is happening, right? So they think,
"Okay, we're done."
So the story is they're hiding in this
upper room and they're scared. In fact,
it's the women who take on the
responsibility of like going and
figuring things out, which in terms of
the time period is actually an
embarrassing fact because of the kind of
cultural dynamics of what's going on.
And so
you have the disciples who think it's
over. What is it that has 11 scared
disciples because one of them Judas goes
and he kills himself. 11 scared
disciples hiding in an upper room
thinking that's it. We're done. We might
as well, you know, Peter, James, and
John might as well just go back to being
fishermen cuz that's all she wrote. to
then having the boldness to go out and
actually proclaim this message
ultimately to
the level of persecution and hardship
that they endure for the rest of their
lives. Well, it's that their rabbi then
shows up alive again. And so, at
minimum, I think what we can say is that
this is a pretty drastic event that
takes place in their life. It's a
comparative to a 9/11 event for them.
And so in terms of like the memory
imprint that they are experiencing
for the murder of their rabbi of their
teacher and then something
happening where they then go
for the rest of their lives. The
martyrdom stories are a little bit
tricky in terms of their historical
reliability. I think a few of them we
can say did happen.
a lot of them is kind of up in the air
but at minimum they suffered
persecution.
>> So the story in the Bible is that he was
killed on the cross, murdered on the
cross and then he was put into a tomb
>> and then who saw him come out of the
tomb.
>> So nobody physically sees him come out
of the tomb. But the women go to the
tomb in the morning and on the third day
and the tomb is empty. And so there are
four accounts, right? And I think it's
interesting also that we have four
accounts that kind of give different
angles on the stories. They're not it's
not as if they got together and they
corroborated and all gave the same
story. The fact is that we have four
accounts that kind of capitalize on
different angles, which the
differentiation in detail, I think,
actually gives credibility to the the
reliability of it. Because if they were
all telling the same thing, you could
argue that they got together and they
colluded. They don't do that. In fact,
they they touch on different aspects of
the story.
>> Are these people saying that they saw
him walk out? Are they saying that they
just saw it empty? What is the claims
being made about his resurrection from
these witnesses?
>> Yeah. So, the tomb is empty.
>> The tomb is empty.
>> And so, it's interesting in in one of
the accounts, um, Mary's at the tomb,
and she actually talks to Jesus, but she
confuses him with a gardener. Now, I
think it's it's interesting that she
doesn't confuse the gardener with Jesus.
She confuses Jesus with the gardener.
Like, she thinks that that this person
she's talking to isn't Jesus. She
doesn't recognize him at first. And she
she asks him, you know, what happened?
Why is the tomb opened? Where did the
body go? And then there's also an
account of an angel appearing and
saying, why are you looking for the
living among the dead? He's not here.
He's risen. And then they go back to the
disciples who are, you know, hiding in
this upper room. Mary says, you know, I
I've I met the tomb's empty. I've met
Jesus. Jesus is not in the the tomb.
He's risen. And some of them don't even
believe her. They think she's crazy.
Now, we don't have like an eyewitness
account of the tomb being open. And this
is actually an embarrassing fact in the
ancient world. So some of those other
gospels that I mentioned earlier that
are written later on, Gospel of Thomas,
Judas, Mary, Peter, there's one of them,
the Gospel of Peter, which is actually
trying to remedy this fact that women
are the first eyewitnesses to the empty
tomb, which is a which is an
embarrassing fact in the ancient world.
If that's not true, if they made it up,
it seems very unlikely that they would
have done that because women are not
considered good eyewitnesses in either
Greco Roman or unfortunately Jewish
society in this time period. So the
gospel of Peter tries to remedy the
situation by having all of the right
people in the right place at the right
time. It has the Jewish and the Roman
officials camping out in front of the
tomb when it actually happens. And then
has this recounted the story of the the
literally the stone moving, Jesus coming
out, all these things. Now, we know it's
not historically reliable. We know that
because of when it was written. We also
know that on the eve of Passover, the
priests would not be camping out in
front of a dead body. It's just
historically um anacronistic.
But it is an account of a literary
source later on that is embarrassed by
what we find in here about the
biographical information of the empty
tomb.
>> So is it just two women that said they
met Jesus in some form after his death?
Mary being one of them which was his
mother.
>> No.
>> Who's Mary?
>> Mary. So there are a number of Marys in
in the New Testament. Um this was Mary
Magdalene.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. who who was like a close
associate.
>> Okay. Like a friend.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So, a friend. And then was there
is it just her that says she saw him
>> in there was a group of them.
>> A group of them.
>> Yeah. Of the women.
>> Okay. And they were separate when they
saw him. They weren't they were on their
own.
>> They were together. So, one of the
gospel only mentions Mary.
>> I believe it's the Gospel of John. But
like I said before, it implies that
there are more because she says we don't
know where they put the body.
>> Okay. So though that account only has
her
recounting it, it implies that there are
others and then the other gospels have
more women that are going to the tomb.
>> As a percentage, what degree of
certainty do you have that he was
resurrected and that um he was who he
said he was? Cuz I agree with you that
this character clearly existed like
Jesus clearly existed. I personally
believe that he was he was killed
>> probably on a cross.
>> But then you get to this point of
resurrection which you have to then
believe in something supernatural.
>> Yeah.
>> So what's the probability you'd assign
to it?
>> I I
>> if it was like likely, unlikely, very
likely.
>> They're all likely because I think that
what the gospel authors are doing is
communicating truth. And I don't
ultimately see an overabundance of
reason why they would write what they
wrote other than actually recounting a
story of what took place.
>> I grew up in a place called Plymouth in
the UK. I was born in Africa and in my
local park there was this big poster on
the wall about the white lady. I'll put
it up on the screen. It's like a big
legend in our city. It's this park and
everybody says that they see this white
lady in the park that was killed. And
actually, there's a big board explaining
her life, but it's all just accounts of
people that say they've seen her.
>> You have things like the Loch Ness
monster in Scotland as well, where
there's been 1,500 sightings of this big
monster in the river. And even up until
recent times, 2025, there was a surge of
sightings of the Loch Ness monster
called the Black Mass in in in the bay.
>> Um, and that started in 565 AD. So, one
of the things that I've always sort of
struggled with when I think about humans
saying they saw something is we still
today have sightings of UFOs and Loch
Ness monsters and white ladies in parks
that become legend. And actually with
the Loch Ness monster, it's pretty
interesting that even today there are
sightings all the time of this monster
that lives in the river. Now, I think
maybe me and you both agree that there's
no monster in the river,
>> but there's something going on. There's
something in human nature where we do
have like a proclivity to engage in
supernatural sightings and then once
we've heard it once, we then reinforce
that we've seen it too. And even as like
a young man, I mean, maybe you believe
this, but like I believe that there was
a woman that would stand on the landing
of my home and it would like wake me up
and I would run and and tell my parents
that the lady stood on the landing.
Again, there's people watching this that
think that there was actually a lady.
Probably maybe there was. But I you know
what I'm getting at is like how do how
can we trust human accounts of these
things when clearly humans have an
ability to make make things up that
aren't real in some situations.
>> Sure. Part of the answer to the question
is one of the evidences for Jesus's
resurrection is the fact that you and I
are still talking about it almost 2,000
years later.
>> My friend said this to me. I was telling
you before about my Christian friend. He
was like why are we still talking about
it? Well I we can't prove it.
>> It wasn't it didn't happen. So we're
always going to talk about it. there's
there's never going to be I mean unless
>> something happens
>> right the difference is that there are
these other messianic movements that
happened in the ancient world
>> and so uh like uh Simon Barora the
reason why we're not talking about Simon
Barora as a messianic figure is because
he died and his movement died with him
>> and his disciples didn't go out and then
proclaim his continued message until
like to their own detriment so I would
say a few things I would say liars make
poor martyrs in that you will die for
something you believe is true, but the
chances of you dying for something you
know is not true
>> are less likely. So if we're talking
about the disciples and especially if
what they're getting for this particular
proclamation is they're being ostracized
from their own communities, pagan
gentile communities and the Jewish
communities because remember there was
persecution on both sides because it was
at a certain point in time continuing to
say that Jesus was the Messiah and on
top of that that he was God himself
was not very popular Within the early
Jesus communities, there's a complexity
to the fact that
people usually lie. You look at cultic
figures, right? Right. Cult leaders
usually do things for prominence or
money or sex or influence. The
interesting thing about the early
disciples is they get none of that. In
fact, they almost get the complete
opposite of that in that Jesus says,
"You're going to be persecuted. you're
going to be put in front of tri
tribunals and you're going to be
interrogated. And that's exactly what
happens. And they know that there is
there's a danger to this because we have
in the book of Acts, which is the book
after the gospels, we have a recounting
of the first martyr of Steven.
>> I think of like someone like Martin
Luther King or Gandhi as being, you
know, leaders from history that appeared
to be from what I've understood very
selfless and actually realized that they
were all going to die. I'll never forget
the speech actually where Martin Luther
King says, "I've been to the mountain
top." He was a very religious man, very
Christian man, and says, "I've been to
the mountain top. You guys get there,
but I don't get there with you."
>> Right?
>> And then from the information I had, he
died very, very shortly thereafter. And
as he's saying, "I don't get there with
you." He's he's emotional in his face.
You see him crying. The video is was
very con persuasive of the Christianity,
by the way.
>> Um, and then he's pulled off stage and
then he's shot thereafter. feels like a
man that knew he wasn't going to live
much longer but was willing to put his
cause ahead of um his own mortality and
um I guess Jesus was doing the same
>> in a certain regard in terms of the
disciples though I think like if they
know this isn't true if they know that
there's this kind of this has been
mythological drift if things have been
exaggerated
why then especially experiencing that
persecution seeing their friends die in
that kind of setting do they continue to
go on and do it.
>> I think they definitely believed it was
true.
>> Yes. I think at minimum whatever is
going on they like you you look at some
of these uh secular historians and they
look at the data and they say whatever's
going on the disciples believe something
happened that they saw something
>> and so the I just think that the
explanations
of the alternatives of that actually
happening are insufficient in so far as
how they actually explain the data. Do
you have any doubt?
>> Oh, of course.
>> Okay. So, you have at least even 1%
doubt.
>> Oh, definitely. And I think especially
when there are times of things that are
far more existential than historical,
when times of like struggle and pain and
suffering, and I look at the world and I
look at how messy it is, the children
who die young, people who are abused,
all of these things, I there are moments
where I think, how how could there be a
good God? I mean, I'm not immune to
doubt. Um, and and the interesting thing
that I find about the Bible is that the
Bible is very open to the God of the
Bible being open to us coming to him
with our doubts.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, onethird of the book of
Psalms, which is like right in the
middle of the Bible, this kind of poetic
literature, if you want to call it that,
are sometimes referred to as the lament
or the complaint psalms. It's things
like Psalm 22, my God, my God, why have
you forsaken me? Why are you so far from
me? I like I cry out by day and I hear
no answer. And I think what's
interesting that I find with the Bible
is its transparency in saying we're
going to struggle. You know, there's
this really great story in the Gospel of
John. Well, this is in a couple of the
instances of the Gospels where John the
Baptist who's like Jesus's cousin and
good friend, he's been in prison because
he's been speaking out against Herod.
He's been being a little bit too verbal
politically. And so he gets taken and
he's in prison. And though he's the one
that baptized Jesus and said, you know,
behold the lamb of God who takes away
the sin of the world. When he's in
prison, he doubts and he sends his
disciples over to Jesus to ask, are you
the Messiah? Are you the one we're
waiting for? Or should we we be waiting
for another? Now, in that interaction,
Jesus actually says, John the Baptist is
the greatest of all men born of women,
which is basically everybody, right? And
yet in that very same setting, John the
Baptist is doubting
that Jesus is who he says he is because
he's experiencing pain and suffering.
>> On that point of um you seeing you know
horrific things happening in the world
and then having doubts. I think for me
that was one of the persuasive arguments
of the like new atheist movement that I
became a part of when I was like 18
years old which was I think Richard
Dawkins had said about you know if God
is all loving
>> then why would he let a 2-year-old kid
in Africa have their eyeball eaten out
from the inside by a parasite.
>> Yeah.
>> Like if if if I could intervene with
that because you know the assertion is
that God is omnipotent or powerful and
omnisient or present.
>> Yeah. If I could intervene with that as
a human, I would stop that. And so if
God is omnipower, omnipotent, sorry, all
powerful and omnipresent, knows
everything and is everywhere, then why
wouldn't he intervene with the baby
having its eyeball eaten out from the
inside?
>> Yeah, it's it's a good point. And I
think if there is an objection that is
truly impactful on Christianity on in
the atheist corner, it is the problem of
evil and always has been because it's
far more of an emotional and existential
question than it is an intellectual
question. Now, part of the problem with
it is that if we're talking about evil
with a capital E, we're implying that
there's a good with a capital G. And so
I think we do run into an issue when
saying that evil exists or implying that
good exists. And if we're implying that
good exists, we're implying that there's
a moral law to adhere to to call the
good good and the evil evil. And if
there's a moral law, then there has to
be a moral lawgiver. And that's where we
come into issues with is this subjective
or is this objective. I think the
atheist movement would argue that that
moral good is virtue of what helps me to
survive. So like watching a small child
suffer in such a way.
>> If I didn't feel anything bad about
that,
>> yeah,
>> then I wouldn't have the wiring for
survival because I wouldn't have the
proclivity to defend a suffering child.
If I don't have that, then I probably
don't reproduce and I don't pass on my
genes and then I'm selected out of
existence. So that pain I feel when I
see a child suffering is a function of
my evolutionary mechanics that make me
more likely to survive and anyone that
didn't have that wouldn't have survived
and wouldn't be here now.
>> Sure.
>> So evolution therefore is the answer.
>> I think that might suffice in certain
instances. However, it's still sort of
smuggling in moral categories into a
biological explanation. So part of I
mean you read Richard Dawkins, you read
you read River Out of Eden and he has
that section where he talks about you
know we shouldn't expect to see any
rhyme or reason good or bad you know DNA
neither knows nor cares. DNA just is and
we dance to its music. And there's an
aspect of Dawkins himself in that volume
at least at that time when he wrote it
articulating that at the end of it all
there is no such thing as actually you
can't call that parasite in that that
boy's eye evil. You can say I don't like
it, but to to import this moral category
of evil is actually to import an idea.
And this is actually what Dawkins was
criticized by by individuals like John
Gray, the philosopher who taught at the
London School of Economics. And he says,
you know, you're a really great
biologist,
but then you want to impart actual
intrinsic value to people. And if you're
looking at a simple selfish DNA
perspective, you can't actually ascribe
that because your DNA, your selfish DNA
exists to carry on its
selfish DNA. And so in one sense, that
child has no bearing on you. Now, it
might have like a a protective mechanism
where you want to figure out why the
child got the parasite, and so you try
to avoid that in order to not get the
parasite yourself. But science
can't actually give you an explanation
for what the moral implications are in
that instance. Let me give you an
example.
>> I think I understand the point there. Um
it's essentially asserting that like why
does that child matter to me? Because my
DNA should just be trying to take care
of itself.
>> Um I guess in biology there's um I don't
always know who my child is. But also
from an evolutionary perspective, if we
were raised in communities and tribes,
we took care of all of our the children.
>> Sure.
>> In in the surroundings, I would take
care of my brother's children and he
would take care of mine, therefore.
>> Yep. Yeah.
>> And again, that goes back to the point
of survival, which means that I'm more
likely to survive if I take care of like
my community sort of. You you read
something like uh the origin of species
though like like uh Darwin himself
when he's articulating the survival of
the fittest there is an aspect of
you shouldn't take care of those people
because they're actually bringing the
genetic gene pool down. So we see even
in like the eugenics movement pulling a
lot from individuals like Darwin in
order to validate the fact that in order
to carry on your selfish DNA, this idea
of taking care of the marginalized and
those with on the fringes of society and
those who are the the lesser than is is
not evolutionary advantageous because
survival of the fittest implies that the
fittest should survive and these are
obviously not the fittest. It's actually
a Judeo-Christian ethic in the
understanding of everybody having equal
value that we should be taking care of
people because they have intrinsic
value, not exttrinsic value. That allows
us to then even import an idea of taking
care of those who are not necessarily
specifically related to me and mine. And
it comes back to okay, where are we
grounding this objectivity in? cuz there
have been societies that have attempted
to do it in like a might is right aspect
and and you ground the objectivity of
what we say is right in a society that
says this is better for the most amount
of individuals within a particular
community. I think about um Yevel Noah
Harrari Harari in his book Sapiens where
he says that the real defining trait of
>> our species versus other species was our
ability to collaborate and basically
scratch each other's backs
>> and that that meant that we had um
evolutionary advantages because if we
could work together in a big group and
we could believe in stories and we
believe in money and prison and
governments etc. we could band together
and take on the lion or band together
and take on the elephant or whatever.
And it's actually that in part there you
have like I need to take care of you,
you need to take care of me and we're
going to reciprocate that altruism uh
and increase our survival chances. So
again that might explain why I care
about that kid um because the species
that didn't
>> Uhhuh.
>> they would never have been able to band
together and take on the elephant.
>> Yes. I think it's largely our modern
perspective living in a society where we
are uh starting on second base already
with our moral perspectives, right? We
have inherited all of these moral
categories because of our
Judeo-Christian ethic. If you look at
basically every society prior to this or
even societies in the east, that's not a
given, right? That's not an assumption.
Especially in societies that have say uh
understandings of karmic cycles whether
that's in like Buddhism or Hinduism the
idea of altruism is actually can be
categorized as an evil because in the
cycle of samsara of birth life death and
rebirth you are actually the your lot in
this life is due to your wrongdoing in
the last life. So in helping someone
like that you are actually inhibiting
them from being reincarnated better on
the other side. So an idea like altruism
doesn't exist within that eastern
society. And if you look in the ancient
world, let's pick on the Babylonians.
The Babylonians, if they were to read
Dawkins' River out of Eden, would
basically say, "Yeah, exactly." Right.
So they have this creation story. It's
called the Inumalish, and it's this big
battle of the gods, and it's uh it's an
origin story, an attempt to explain why
everything is here. But the conclusion
of it is basically you are a product of
a big battle and a mistake, right? The
one god loses and you, everything around
you, the earth, the sky, it's just the
remains of the gods that lost. So
meaning, value, purpose, not really
ultimately. You're just the product of
time plus matter plus chance as well.
It's just framed within a religious
perspective. whereas Dawkins frames it
in a natural materialistic perspective.
So where do we get the categories
to even say that we should be taking
care of people in communities outside of
our specific community
because in some cultures they have the
ethic of love thy neighbor but in others
it's eat thy neighbor and so the
question is which society do you want to
pick? And you're saying that that came
from Judeo-Christian values.
>> Yes,
>> I would agree. Yeah, I would agree that.
I think I'm trying to understand if it's
innate in us from a God what's good and
evil or whether it's, you know, we we
all subscribe to a culture that was, you
know, the foundation of that was these
Christian values and um yeah, which one
is it?
>> Yeah. Well, was I born with a good and
evil or was 2,000 or 3,000 years ago
when Jesus came to be and we had these
books? Did that just influence them?
>> Yeah. Well, I think ultimately there's
an aspect of our conscience that's
imprinted on us that we we understand
ethics to some degree or another, but
the framework to actually find the
objectivity of that ethic is found in
the revelation of specific revelation in
scripture.
>> Do you believe in evolution?
>> I don't.
>> You don't believe it's true?
>> No. I am open to the fact that I don't
think that a belief in evolution
undermines Christianity in any way.
However, I'm and prefacing this by
saying I'm not a scientist. I'm an
advocate for intelligent design and I
would basically punt the complex
conversations of evolutionary biology to
individuals who are far more studied
than me like Steven Meyer and Jonathan
Mcclache and John Tours and
Douglas Axe and those individuals who
have studied it. At the exact same time
though it also depends on what you mean
by evolution, right? So like adaptation
genetically is a thing
>> I guess. So I'm saying do you believe
that we evolved from very simple
organisms to become a human that you see
today?
>> No.
>> And the argument for that would be you
know I share 98% of the same DNA as like
a chimpanzeee and we have these fossil
records which seem to show a progression
over time.
>> You don't believe that's true?
>> No I don't. But at the exact same time,
I think, you know, there are individuals
within the Christian faith, intelligent
people who do and have no problem with
understanding of a theistic evolutionary
model. However, I think in the effort of
survival of the fittest, I still think
that you're starting a few miles down
the road in answering the question of
the arrival of the fittest. How do minds
come from mindless matter? How does
everything come from nothing? How do how
do we answer those questions? And I
think that's why you can use the
evolutionary model as an explanation of
how God has actually created right the
biology of the situation. But I think
the bigger question is the cosmological
questions. How did this all get going?
You know, the big bang, what was the big
banger?
How did that first ball get rolling? And
then why can you and I, Stephen, sit
here and like I said before, have the
three lbs of gray matter in my head kind
of uh ruminate over these very complex
questions.
>> You know, I I think it was on the
Galapicus Islands. I'm probably going to
butcher this, but I'll I'll do my very
best. They, you know, the sailors went
to an island, they left a bird there,
they came back 50 years later, the
bird's beak had grown to be very, very
long
>> because the prey on that island that it
was eating were in in hole. So, they
needed longer beaks. So, it kind of
shows us that if you leave an animal in
an environment, it will adapt and it's,
you know, it will select out the the
short beak birds for the long beak
birds. And just in that short period of
time, you can see that it's like, you
know, it's becoming a different type of
animal. And if you extrapolate that out
over a long long period of time, almost
an inconceivable amount of time, you
know, maybe hundreds of millions of
years,
>> one can understand why like me and a
chimpanzeee,
there are similarities in how we look.
Um, and there are 99% similar like 98%
similarities in my DNA and a chimp
chimpanzeee's DNA. So, one would argue
that we are we have a common ancestor.
Yeah,
>> it's like very compelling evidence to
me.
>> Sure. I mean, it's the transitions going
from as the chimpanzeee type thing,
right? Because we're obviously not
arguing that that we were a chimpanzeee,
a chimpanzeee exist today, but that
yeah, that homminid, whatever that
homminid was,
>> what is the transitionary
fossil explanation whatever that goes
from the monkey to the human being? And
I don't really think we have an answer
for that in terms of consciousness
questions like why what makes our
ability to reason and think and
contemplate different than all of the
other species in the animal kingdom. And
how do we go if we're arguing that, you
know, everything comes from
single-sellled organisms?
I guess you could have a if you want to
call it a time of the gaps explanation,
you know, just just add lots of millions
of years and it solves this issue. I
don't know if I am completely satisfied
with that answer if cuz obviously
there's adaptation but you know if
you're looking at whether there's the
dodo bird example or Darwin's finches
right where the beaks are different um
you're still getting beaked birds and
we've never seen one species turn into a
completely different species
>> the thing that I filled the gap with is
that it's just a matter of time so you
know with the birds example it's like 50
years or something or decades
But when we think about Earth being like
5 billion years old,
>> I think it's almost inconceivable what
can happen over such a long period of
time like it's conceivable that if me
and you went to different parts of
planet Earth and lived in two completely
different environments and then we came
back 5 billion years later and there was
no medicine and no factors helping us to
survive that you know we would have
branched gone in two different
directions completely and you you know
your ancestors who were living in the
jungle might
9 foot and actually what was useful for
survival where I lived in some cave was
being 2t tall,
>> right?
>> And then we wouldn't be able to
reproduce which kind of makes us
different species now. Like that's I
mean that's sounds conceivable for me
over four like 4.5 billion years. Seems
conceivable that
like we both agree on adaptation.
>> Mhm.
>> Like small adaptations. But then if you
expand the time horizon, those small
adaptations become massive.
>> Yeah. I mean ultimately no matter which
way you want to swing it, I think the
adding millions of years as the
explanation is a little bit too
convenient.
>> But I think at the end of the day,
you're still looking at the complexity
in nature that points to a design of
something that is is amazing.
And the the question of okay, how do we
Dawkins is, you know, famous for saying
that that it it has the illusion of
design to it, right? There's not not
actually a design to it. It's just the
illusion of design. But I think, you
know, if we actually look at when Darwin
was writing, they thought the smaller
you got, the simpler it got. And now we
know that the smaller you get, in fact,
the more complex you get.
>> As in the more you zoom into the design,
like the more you zoom into the brain or
>> Yeah. Our understanding of science has
grown exponentially even from Darwin's
day. And there's an aspect of like
Darwinian evolution that is is has moved
on into what we would now call like
neodyarwinian evolutionary theory.
And you look at um individuals like I
mentioned Steven Meyer before and he
even uh has questioned some of these
things about the explanations that are
working as givens for evolutionary
theory. I still don't think it gets us
back to, okay, then why do we have
purpose?
>> I've had so many founders speak to me
and say, why didn't this particular ad
that I ran on this platform work for me?
Maybe the copy wasn't good, the creative
wasn't strong, but usually the problem
is they're not having the right
conversation because that ad never
reached the right person. And if you're
in B2B marketing, that is much of the
game. And this is where LinkedIn ads
solves that problem for you. Their
targeting is ridiculously specific. You
can target by job title, seniority,
company size, industry, and even
someone's skill set. And their network
includes over a billion professionals.
About 130 million of them are decision
makers. So when you use LinkedIn ads,
you're putting your brand in front of
the right people. And LinkedIn ads also
drive the highest B2B return on ad spend
across all ad networks in my experience.
If you want to give them a try, head
over to linkedin.com/diary.
And when you spend $250 on your first
LinkedIn ads campaign, you'll get an
extra $250 credit from me for the next
one. That's linkedin.com/diary.
Terms and conditions apply.
Every time I've tried to improve
something in my life, like my
businesses, my health, my relationships,
I've noticed that the biggest shifts
have come from being better informed.
And when it comes to our health, most of
us know very, very little. So when our
team was approached about partnering
with Function Health, it felt very much
aligned. Their team has developed a way
of giving you a full 360deree view of
your health, many of the things that are
going on in your body in the form of
different tests. You do one blood draw
and it gives you access to over 160 lab
results, hormones, heart health,
inflammation, stress, toxins, the whole
picture. I use it and so have many of my
team members.
>> You sign up and you schedule your test
and once you're done, you get a little
report like the one I have here. I can
see my inrange results, my out of range
results, and there's a little AI
function, too. So, if I have any
questions about my out of range results,
I can just go in there and ask it any
question I want. And these tests are
backed by doctors and thousands of hours
of research.
>> It's $365 for a yearly membership. Go to
functionhealth.com/doac
and use the code DOAC25
for $25 off your membership.
Where do you think we came from? Like,
where do you think I came from or my
ancestors came from? Do you think they
were put on Earth as humans? Do you
believe in the Adam and Eve story? Do
you think there was some kind of
evolution? And when did you think this
when do you think this happened?
>> So I know that the world is at least 35
years old.
>> Uh I don't think it's an answer that the
Bible is actually attempting to address
in terms of the age of the earth.
>> Billions of years old. I don't see any
reason not to because I don't think that
the creation story in Genesis chapter 1
is necessarily
an attempt to reveal the mechanisms of
how God did that exactly
>> cuz the sort of scientific consensus
says that it's roughly 4.5 billion years
old the earth.
>> Yeah.
>> And microbes and single cellled
organisms are estimated to have appeared
3.5 to 4 billion years ago almost as
soon as Earth. Cold enough to have
liquid water.
>> Sure. Yeah. And and I'm I'm fine with
that actually. I don't I don't think I
have to adhere to neo neodyarwinian
evolution in order to actually believe
that the world is old. I think I would
adhere to an intelligent design thesis.
But
>> what does that mean?
>> So essentially that the the world around
us is intelligently designed. Not
necessarily in that it it came through
processes of evolution. Once again, I'm
not a scientist, right? I'm a historian.
I I genuinely do believe that there was
a historical Adam and Eve and that those
were the first people.
>> Okay.
>> Now, what did they look like? I don't
know. I think they they probably lived a
long long time ago. And I don't know if
the breakdown of Genesis chapter 1 and
the like seven days of creation are
actually attempting to articulate seven
24-hour days. They could be.
>> Yeah.
>> I just don't think that's the point. But
you do believe that humans were put here
as humans
>> and you believe that the other animals
were put here in their in some kind of
early form.
>> Yes.
>> And then you also believe in adaptation
of those species. Fine. Okay. Fine.
>> And going back to like talking about
trying to explain these things
scientifically. I always find like we
can explore the answers scientifically,
but that's only going to get us so far,
especially when we're discussing meaning
and purpose questions. So, let me give
you uh a little bit of a story that a
friend of mine, Glenn Scrier, uh likes
to articulate in uh this parable that he
tells that he calls Betty the botist.
So, you have Betty the botist and she's
been uh looking at a plant sample in her
lab. She's been spending all weekend
looking at this plant sample. She's been
uh you know, investigating it and doing
all of these tests on it all weekend.
And Jerry, the lab assistant, comes in
on Monday. And
Betty looks at Jerry and says, "Jerry,
thank you for the botanic botanical
specimen that you left me on the
weekend. Thank you for this botanical
specimen. I've been doing all of these
tests. I've been looking at the
components of it and the complexity of
the biology and there are
pharmacological implications that I've
extrapolated from its various biological
components and we can use these to cure
diseases. There's so many things. Thank
you so much for the botanical specimen.
And Jerry says,
"Betty,
it was February 14th on the weekend.
That was a long stem rose.
>> Do you know what I left for you? Do you
know what the implication of the
botanical specimen, as you're calling
it, was for what I was trying to
communicate to you?" Now, did Betty the
Botnist understand the long stem rose?
In one way, she understood it more than
most because she had done all of the
tests and run through all of the
different ways that she could
extrapolate what that thing was.
But what Jerry was trying to actually
illustrate was something that went
beyond that. It was a love gift. He was
trying to communicate something that
went beyond the simple biology. and and
Betty could very simply say, "Well, I
couldn't get that from the data. I I
couldn't have extrapolated the
implications of it being a love gift."
And in that so far as it being a
parable, we can look at all of the
scientific explanations, but there's
something that goes beyond the simple
data in terms of meaning and purpose and
desire,
identity questions that go far beyond
that, right? Like we can look, I could
tell you the different chemical
components that make up the page and the
ink and like the size of the paper and
it transparency and all of that. I could
say, you know, Stephen, what is this?
And you could go into all of this
explanation about how paper is made and
the pulp and how we extrapolated and
eventually put it together and the
binding and and I could say, okay, yeah,
but this is a Bible. This is meant to
communicate something to you. you know,
what is the explanation for this? One
explanation could be the chemical and
and you know, scientific components that
make up the Bible. Another explanation
could be this is a religious text that's
actually trying to communicate something
to you. And so I think in the scientific
data,
all of that is obviously important,
right? Like there's this great quote by
C. Lewis where he says that men were
scientific because they expected laws in
nature and so they looked for the
legislator
and you look you read individuals like
Francis Bacon who came up with the the
scientific method and they're inherently
religious right they almost articulate
what they're doing in their scientific
endeavor as an act of worship because if
the exploration of the creative world
points to a creator then that can be an
act of understanding who and why we're
here. In terms of the scientific
questions, I'm very interested in them,
especially as a non-scientist. They
fascinate me. But in terms of the
meaning questions,
I think I would air on the side of
caution of attempting to be Betty the
botist and sometimes I read individuals
like Dawkins and I'm I'm hearing Betty
the Botnist extrapolate and define the
botanical specimen. I think part of the
reason why the new atheist movement that
I again was captured by was not
sufficient is because as you say it
didn't
it didn't fill some kind of gap
>> and and much of the gap I think for a
lot of people is okay so if if I believe
in the science and and that argument and
the atheist argument or I believe in the
Bible I still need a an answer to like
yeah but so what like what's the point
of this even in the example of evolution
I yeah but why am I evolving
Why? Why am I trying to survive?
>> Yeah.
>> A means to what end? Okay, I'm trying to
have more kids, but then why are my kids
trying to have more kids? What's the
point?
>> And you just keep hitting this wall of
like, okay, but what's the point? What's
the point? Am I meant to do something?
Is it is there a mission for me?
>> Right?
>> And I think that question is one that I
think about uh sometimes, which is
>> no matter what I believe, like what is
the point? And I think that's why the
Bible is such an amazing explanation for
that. Because in a world that tells you
ultimately that you're a product of time
plus matters chance, the Bible looks at
you, Stephen, and says you're created
with meaning and purpose and intention.
You bear the image of God.
So there's something that is actually
screaming from your biology
about who you are that goes beyond the
fact that you're not just a physical
specimen sitting in front of me. Right?
You have a mind and that mind is maybe
your brain or we're not even sure about
that. Right?
>> So what makes Steven Steven? You're not
not your body. And that's why I mean
there's this inherent conversation
within Christianity about the fact that
our hope is not a spiritual one. The end
result is the resurrection, right? The
reason why Jesus rose from the dead is
scripture calls him the first fruit. So
we're all going to be resurrected.
There's going to be a new heaven and a
new earth. And that's the promise of
Christianity, is it?
>> So, so that's the point.
>> Yes.
>> The point of this life according to the
Bible is that I get to go to this place
called heaven.
>> No. So it's a both and. So when g when
Jesus's disciples ask him how to pray,
he says, you know, he gives them the
Lord's prayer. Our father, who art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy
kingdom come, thy will be done on earth
as it is in heaven. So it's not just
about, you know, I'm going to die and my
spirit's going to go to somewhere else.
And you know, that's the whole goal.
It's to bring heaven here as well. What
we do matters because you're a human
being. You're not a human doing. And so
what you do here and who you are here
actually has an implication
>> to to who and what
>> to everything. So we're put here to be
stewards of creation of each other to be
examples of imagebearers of God. Like
your life has intrinsic meaning.
>> Internal meaning. Yeah.
>> Internal meaning more than just what you
can contribute. Right. Right. So that
would be exttrinsic your ability to give
back to society your ability to uh
contribute to the advancement of
scientific technological you know fill
in the gap you have value that goes
beyond that right this is why we fight
for people everywhere
and that's I think why injustice
something like injustice bothers us so
much and why evil bothers us so much.
>> You know the chimpanzeee that has like
98% the same DNA as me. Yeah.
>> Do they have the same intrinsic meaning?
You know, even my dog, I'm like, does my
dog have that same intrinsic meaning?
And is my dog going to go to heaven?
>> I think scripture tells us what we need
to know, not always what we want to
know. There have been individuals
throughout church history who have
articulated that. I mean, St. Francis of
Aisi was big on animals going to heaven.
Uh C. Lewis was big on animals going to
heaven. Um, in fact, when he wrote the
last battle, you know, the last series
in his line, the witch in the wardrobe
books, uh, there are animals in heaven.
I mean, if there's a new Earth, I think
there are going to be animals. I don't
know if they're going to be the same
animals that existed on this side, but I
also I have no idea. But I think there's
something different because I think you
have a soul.
>> And you think my dog doesn't have a
soul?
>> I don't know. But I don't think he has
the same kind of
spiritual component that you are endowed
with in the same way.
>> How do we know? Like, how do we how do I
know that? You know, these chimpanzees,
they're pretty smart. I was watching one
touch a touchcreen the other day and
solving problems and I was thinking is
it is there not like an element of I
don't know human arrogance to think that
these other creatures like the big the
whales they're so unbelievably smart
they don't have a soul they work
together in packs they love they have
kids they seem to pursue things yeah I
mean I think that's a testimony to kind
of the general reflection of God's good
creation at the same time we describe
when you're just repeating something we
we use adjectives like aping
We understand that there's an aspect of
like if you train the monkey to push the
button, it's going to push the button.
If you give the elephant the paintbrush
and kind of, you know, convince it to
paint itself, it's going to paint
itself. But if you if you can train the
elephant to paint the Mona Lisa, is it
really going to understand what it's
painted in the same way that
Michelangelo understands it? Sorry, Da
Vinci, who painted the Mona Lisa. Now
I'm getting myself into trouble. Whoever
painted the Mona Lisa, Da Vinci, there's
something about the value and what is
being put in there that is different.
>> So do you believe that me and you are
born with a particular mission and
meaning on this planet or do you think
we have to go and find that particular
meaning or mission?
>> That's a great question. Uh I think
the chief end of man is to know God
and glorify him in so far as Jesus is
asked what is the greatest commandment
in the law. And Jesus uses two examples.
He quotes from you know two different
passages in the Old Testament and he
says love the Lord your God with all of
your heart, soul, mind and strength and
love your neighbor as yourself. I mean
ultimately I think we always want some
sort of a grandiose
purpose and we want the calling of like
Moses. We want to go out in the bush or
we want to go out in the desert and find
a burning bush and have that calling on
our lives.
I don't think that's wrong. But I think
ultimately our purpose is to live a
faithful life to who we were created to
be in being image bearsers of God and
being faithful in loving God with
everything that we have. So that like
the Jewish phraseiology of loving God
with all of our heart, soul, mind, and
strength. It's kind of a standin for
your entire being with everything you
have. Love God with that by what you do,
by what you say, by how you live. Like
do unto others as you would have them do
unto you, right? That's the golden rule.
But if you look at other religions, it's
almost always framed in the negative.
Don't do unto others what you don't want
done to you. So there's a difference
between not punching someone in the face
and building someone a hospital. So the
meaning of our lives is to love our
creator at the most fundamental level
>> at the basic level and to understand how
that expresses in everyday life. So
Martin Luther, the German Protestant
reformer, he said the the faithful
Christian um shoemaker
doesn't glorify God by sewing little
crosses into the shoes, but by making
really good quality shoes. And so
there's an aspect of God has endowed us,
right? We're created in God's image. We
create as an aspect of an outpouring of
that which we are created to be. And we
we do that well. You know, the proverb
says, "Whatever your hand um finds to
do, do it with all its might." And the
idea is, you know, you have the
capability to do incredible things. And
the reason why you have that capability
is because you bear the image of a
creator who like I said before lives in
a set of living loving relationships.
And so that God actually didn't need to
create you me anything. Right? So God is
not better off or worse off if we love
him or worship him or believe in him. He
he really isn't. He has existed in a in
love in relationship.
And yet the story of the Bible is that
God chooses to create out of an
outpouring of his love knowing even that
we are going to rebel against him. We
are going to sin right do wrong against
how he has actually created us to be and
still desires to have that relationship.
>> And if we do sin
>> Mhm.
>> if I sin in my life do I go to hell? You
you don't
I mean the answer to that is yes and no.
But the
>> am I going to hell?
>> Are you going to hell? Steven Bartlett.
Is Steven Bartlett going to hell? This
is the clip that they're going to put
online, right? Wes says Stephen Bartlett
is going to hell. I mean, here's the
thing. Everybody is going to hell.
Everybody. Here's how I've said it in
the past, right? The Bible is very
clear. All good people go to heaven. But
Jesus said, "No one is good but God
alone." So if all good people go to
heaven
and no one is good but God alone, only
God is in heaven.
>> So do you believe that there is a a hell
and a heaven as we sort of typically
understand it? A place that is great to
go to after we die and a place that is
very hot.
>> Place that is very hot. I mean there's a
lot of imagery of um like fire and
weeping and nashing of teeth. I think a
lot of that uh is kind of reflective and
allegorical more than it's like a a
physical tangible thing that is you know
most of our perceptions of hell are
largely shaped by depictions in the
Middle Ages of Dante's Inferno and that
kind of thing right I think it's more so
that
you will experience the full weight of
the separation from God's goodness not
necessarily a separation from God
because I
God's punishment and his wrath are going
to be felt there. But if we're talking
about like a good place, bad place
in the very simplest of terms, yes, but
heaven isn't full of good people. Heaven
is full of people who understand they
are not good enough. And so I mentioned
that like justice mercy thing. Justice
is fulfilled on Jesus. So because
justice is fulfilled now,
mercy, which is not getting what we do
deserve, is able to be given to those
who put their trust in Jesus.
>> So if I don't believe in Jesus and I
don't believe in the Bible,
>> but I live a
>> good life, I'm nice to people,
charitable, try and be kind wherever I
can be.
>> Yeah.
>> And I don't believe in God, am I going
to hell or heaven as it relates to the
scriptures? Well, I don't think if
you're living your life rejecting God,
God is not going to force you into his
presence.
>> So, I'm not going to go into he I'm not
going to go to heaven then.
>> No.
>> Where am I going to go?
>> Well, you would you would go hell.
>> So So if I don't believe in the Bible
and Jesus and God, then I'm going to go
to hell.
>> Yes. In so far as if
heaven is a place for those who have
submitted their lives to Jesus, who are
living the identity of what they're
created to be and said, "Your will be
done, God."
>> Yeah.
>> Hell is a place where God says, "You
rejected me. Your will be done. I'm
going to I'm going to give you what you
want in that I'm going to remove my
grace and mercy from you and you are
going to experience truly what you
desire in being separated from me and my
goodness and my grace.
>> And what is that place like according to
the scripture? Give me a give me a
depiction in my mind of what hell might
be like for me.
>> Yeah. I mean, it's not a good place.
It's not a nice place. is a place that
no matter what's going on,
if you are a believer, if you if you
truly understand what this book is
saying, seriously, I think it should
motivate you to want to desire. Steven
Bartlett, I desire you to have a
personal relationship with your creator
because I don't want you to experience
whatever hell is. I I I desire for you
to be in perfect
relationship with your God. Not
necessarily because I want you to get a
get out of hell free card, but because I
actually think that in living how God
created you to be in accepting living
out the image that you bear, you're
going to find the meaning and purpose
that you ultimately have expressed that
you have this innate desire for. I think
it's about I think it's according to
Gallup it's 18% of Americans don't
believe in a god
>> now to get into heaven
>> as it's described in the Bible do I just
need to say I believe in God or do I
have to have some sort of active
commitment and evidence in my life that
I am living my life in line with God's
you know teachings
>> I think ultimately salvation right
salvation implies you're being saved
from something
>> right the good news is good news because
the bad news is bad.
>> And the bad news is very bad. I was
looking at what the Bible says about
hell and in um Revelations it says it's
a lake of fire. In Mark it says it's
unquenchable fire.
>> In Matthew it says eternal fire prepared
for the devil and his angels.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh in Matthew again it says outer
darkness where there will be weeping and
nashing of teeth.
>> Yes.
>> They will be shut out from the presence
of the Lord. Weeping and nashing of
teeth and torment. Eternal punishment.
and the smoke of their torment rises
forever. This is not a place I want to
go.
>> No. No. And I think I think the urgency
of the Christian message is the bad news
is really bad. And that's what makes the
good news so good. Jesus
has taken on that hell on your behalf.
And it goes beyond simply a believing,
right? It's not just about saying the
right words. It's not just a an
incantation.
You are not saved by what you do, right?
You're saved by works. It's just
Jesus's. Jesus lived the life you
couldn't and made the sacrifice you
can't
on your behalf in order to establish
that right relationship with God. So
that's where grace comes into the
picture. Justice is getting what you do
deserve. Mercy is not getting what you
do deserve. Grace is getting what you
don't deserve.
So
in so far as Christ on the cross
fulfills the justice of his holy law,
mercy is enacted and you don't get that
punishment by putting your faith and
trust in Jesus as your lord and your
savior as your creator. You don't get
that punishment and now you get grace
which is not what you're owed but you
are adopted as a child of the most high.
So of the 18% of people that say they
don't believe in a god, they are almost
certainly going tell according to
scripture.
>> Well, so James, the book of James in the
Bible, who's actually the um the uh
halfb brotherther of Jesus um he writes
a book and he says, "You believe that
God is one." He says, "Great. So do the
demons."
So the point is like if anybody knows
and believes in God, it's the demons.
It's Satan, right? So, so what's the
difference there?
>> The difference is there is that there's
a relational component of when we in in
sort of the Christianes Christian
terminology when I say Jesus is your
Lord and your Savior, what I mean is
that he has rescued you. He has saved
you from the penalties of sin and death.
But then the Lord component is that now
you have submitted your life to him in
obedience and repentance. Now repentance
is kind of another religious word that
maybe is not always fully understood.
Repentance is the changing and
understanding of the way you live. You
understand that the things that you used
to do
that are wrong are not the things that
are either what you should do or are
going to give you fulfillment.
And you stop doing those not because God
is a cosmic killjoy and he doesn't want
you to feel the goodness of those things
but because those things are actually
harmful to you. They are hurting you and
they are creating a separation of the
relationship between you and God.
>> There's going to be a very small number
of people that actually live in such a
way that are fully repented and have
accepted the Lord as their savior.
Right? there's only rough I think it was
30% of people actually go to church
somewhat frequently and uh
>> the other sort of 56% seldom will never
go that they're not really really active
in their belief. They probably haven't
repented. So it would appear to me that
a very small percentage of people are
actually qualifying for the kingdom of
heaven as it's described in the Bible.
>> The miracle of this is that your
salvation is received not achieved. And
so once again, it's it's not about like
brownie points. It's not about checking
off, you know, I read the Bible as many
times. I went to church as many times. I
you know, I didn't lie. I didn't steal.
I didn't cheat. I didn't um because we
still exist in this beautiful yet broken
world. And because we live in a world
that is marred by the brokenness of the
fall
of our first parents, Adam and Eve,
making that decision to rebel against
God. And because of that, now the the
creation itself has been affected.
It's not about trying to earn my way
into heaven. So is it a very small
percentage of people who are actually
repenting? Maybe. But what of those what
of that percentage is attempt who fully
understands? It's interesting the word
that we translate as repentance is the
Greek word metaninoia. It means change
your mind. And so there's an aspect of
it's not just about the doing.
It's an understanding. It's a component
of I don't want to do these things. Even
when I do them, I I don't I don't want
to lie anymore. Like I see the harm that
that causes and the brokenness that it
creates. And so even if I'm still
breaking the law of God, right? So, in
the book of James that I mentioned, uh
there's this part where James says if
you break one
rule in the law, you it's as if you've
broken them all. And I've sometimes used
this illustration of it's like you're
hanging off a cliff uh on a linked
chain, right? If you cut any of those
links, you're going to fall, right? It's
no longer holding you. That's kind of
the the thinking that I think James is
getting at when he writes that. So you
reference the original sin which is Adam
and Eve taking the apple
>> or fruit
>> or the fruit whatever it might be. God
made Adam and Eve. He's omnipotent
omniscient. When he made them he knew
they were going to take the apple.
>> Mhm.
>> But he made them anyway.
>> So that sounds like a setup.
>> I you could read it as a setup. I think
more so what's going on I think what
what's what's the what strikes me as
more amazing is that God did it anyways
and he didn't hit the restart button
>> and then he knew that when he made them
that it would result in this thousands
and thousands of year years of people
worshiping him
>> Mhm. I think you'd think I was a bad
person like if I made something knowing
that it was going to make a mistake and
that mistake would result in people
worshiping me for the next forever.
>> Sure.
>> You you would say I did this to get you
to worship me. Sure.
>> And to basically make you live in guilt
>> that I appropate like logically that's
like hold no. Like what's wrong with
that logically?
>> Well, I think I think you could read it
like that. Uh I think ultimately and
this might sound like a copout to some,
but maybe God knows something we don't.
>> Yeah, maybe. Yeah.
>> And uh that he has reasons for allowing
evil that maybe we don't understand and
can't comprehend because he is God.
There's an interesting thing in both the
book of revelation and in one of the
letters of Peter where it basically says
from uh before the foundation of the
world was laid the lamb was slain. So
Jesus
was crucified that the cross that whole
bringing back people in unity and
relationship with God via this act of
the only innocent person who ever lived
being murdered on a cross. Right? great
act of evil accomplishing a lot of good.
Once again, not the way I would do it if
I was God, right? There's all sorts of
things that we think, you know, if I was
God, I'd do it like this. Um, thank
goodness I'm not God. Uh, I would get a
whole lot of things wrong. You wouldn't
want to live in that world. But I think
what's interesting is that the cross was
not a contingency plan. The cross was
the plan all the way along. And so God
is glorified in that act. And I think
part of it is what I was saying before.
If God is love, if love is the greatest
ethic, and the greatest ethic is
expressed in
the greatest example, which is
self-sacrifice, then God is actually
communicating the greatest ethic in the
greatest possible way in what we see in
the gospel message of how he
accomplishes
the unification with his people for the
goodness and glory of who he is. And do
I understand all the complexities and
mysteries that go in conjunction with
that? No. But I'm convinced beyond a
reasonable doubt that the historical and
the philosophical case for the existence
of God and then that God specifically
being the God that is articulated in the
Bible is true. And on that basis,
I am willing to submit my life because
of both the evidence and because I've
actually seen my own life change
radically. So you're you're a friend,
right? You say like you've seen an
actual
experiential change in that person's
life.
>> Oh, yeah. No, my so my friend um I
talked about him anonymously on here,
but he then clipped it, posted on his
Instagram and said Stephen's talking
about me. Okay.
>> And he's he's like doing some interviews
and stuff now. So I feel more
comfortable talking about him more
publicly. But yeah, my friend who was
going through a little bit of a crisis
of meaning in his life was living in
Dubai in this penthouse apartment,
single, kind of alone, remote working,
>> all those kinds of, you know, very
individualistic lifestyle, successful in
a material sense,
>> all of a sudden turned to Christianity,
flew to America, got baptized, and is
now
>> Christian.
>> Yeah.
>> And would I say he is happier than
before? 100%. Would I say I am very glad
he became Christian? 100%. Would I say
that I believe his future's going to be
better because he's now a Christian?
100%. That's a lot of 100%.
>> No, but it's true. It's objectively
true. Like I even spoke to we've been
friends for decades and all of us feel
the same way. We don't even have to
agree with what he believes to think
actually he's it's helped him. Well, and
in that I don't think that I think
there's an objectivity to the actual
evidence that I evaluate in terms of the
historical reliability of the Bible and
the philosophical explanations for
meaning and purpose and morality, how we
ground those, the scientific data of a
universe that looks like it's fine-tuned
and has intelligence designed into it.
But the subjectivity of how I understand
my life and have seen it change
radically and what what you see in your
friend is not inconsequential.
>> No, it's not.
>> And it it it testifies to something. It
testifies to a hope that even in
scripture in 1 Peter 3,
Peter writing to the dispersed church in
the ancient world has this in the
context of persecution says, "But in
your hearts rever Christ as Lord. Always
be prepared to give an answer to
everyone who asks you to give a reason
for the hope that you have. But do so
with gentleness and respect, keeping a
clear conscience so that those who speak
maliciously against your good behavior
in Christ will be ashamed of their
slander." And there's this implication
that always be prepared to give an
answer to everyone who asks you for an
argument for the existence of God. No,
that's not what he says. He says to give
the reason for the hope that you have.
Your friend is communicating a hope that
you took notice of. And I think that is
literally the word to give an answer
that we translate as to give an answer,
defense, or reason in many English Bible
translations is the Greek word apologia.
to give an apologetic to give a defense
and scripturally
scripture does call us to love the Lord
our God with all of our mind and I think
there's an aspect of God if I my friend
Tim Barnett works for actually stand to
reason which is Greg Kokal's
organization you had Greg Greg in in in
your uh panel discussion recently my
friend Tim says if you want to know the
mind of God you better start by using
your own and so in that way I think we
can worship God through that you know
there's a component of God has endowed
us with intelligence and we can use that
to speak to the things that he has
actually
created and the evidence for that. But
at the exact same time the hope of the
life changed of to use you know Jesus's
own language in John 3 being born again
I think also communicates something that
is genuinely profound. I
agree and I
I would assert that maybe if he had
converted to pretty much any of the
major religions, he would have
experienced the same transformative
upside.
>> And when you look at people that do
convert to other religions outside of
Christianity, they do experience a
greater sense of meaning and community
and all the things that come with it
that gives them that sense of belonging
and maybe calms their anxieties and
their worries and their nihilism to a
point where they can live a bit more of
a content life. So is it is that
evidence of Christianity or is that just
evidence that we're all in search of
meaning in a world that's increasingly
nihilistic and individualistic and says
that there's nothing other than as you
say like time space matter etc.
>> No that's a great point. I don't think
it's arbitrary. I think you know there's
an aspect of religiosity that is always
going to be a net positive for society
no matter what that religion is because
I think it's going to give an aspect of
purpose and identity to people. At the
exact same time, I don't think it's just
the subjective point of view. Right?
This is why I think it's very dangerous
when I go out. So, I used to work for a
a minister organization that worked on
university campuses and we would go and
we would talk with students and uh I too
many times to count would hear a student
ask another student, why do you believe
in Christianity? And they would then
proceed in articulating how they became
a Christian. Mhm.
>> Well, that's not the answer, right?
That's not the actually the question
they asked. They asked, "Why do you
believe it's true and you answered with
how you kind of got into this group if
they had ran into a Buddhist, they said,
why do you believe Buddhism is true?"
and you say, you know, well, I just met
these really great people on campus and
they invited me over for, you know,
karma discussions and pizza and and it's
radically changed my life and I, you
know, follow the noble truths and the
the the path of the Buddha and it it's
changed my life.
When you give them that story, now I
don't I don't want people to hear me
saying that giving your testimony is not
a good thing to do. I just think there's
a time and a place where it could have
been any situation. It sounds
convenient. You could have run into a
Muslim or a Mormon or a Buddhist or a
Hindu and just stumbled into those
conversations. And that's where I think
answering why I believe it's true
is more than just that. It's no less
than that, but it's more than that
because I believe that the multivalent
argument for the truthfulness with the
capital T of Christianity has a
historical backing and a philosophical
backing and scientific backing and
psychological backing and all of those
things. And I bet your friend would say
it too.
>> Oh yeah,
>> I bet he would.
>> Yeah.
>> And in one sense, my goal is to adhere
to truth with a capital T even above my
allegiance to Jesus. Now, I believe
Jesus is the truth with a capital T. So,
I I don't think that there's a conflict
of interest there. But I I want to
follow what's true because even if it's
a convenient lie, it's still a lie and I
don't want to live my life for a lie.
New year always has a strange energy to
it because people start talking about
their goals, fresh starts, and new
habits. But the reality is that most
people carry the same ideas they had
last year into the new year. I'm guilty
of that, too. and they still don't end
up doing anything with them. And I get
why starting something new, especially
if it's a business or a project, is
overwhelming. Before you start, you're
looking for the perfect moment and to be
the perfect version of yourself. When
really, what matters most is taking that
first step. If you've had an idea for a
while, a product, a store, something
you've been sitting on, our sponsor,
Shopify, makes it easy to get started
because you can build your store, sell
on socials, take payments, use AI tools,
and manage everything all in one place.
So, if 2026 is the year you finally back
yourself, go to shopify.co.uk/bartlet
and start selling. And you can sign up
for a $1 per month trial right now, too.
Just go to shopify.co.uk/bartlet.
I promise you, you don't need to have it
all figured out. You just need to start.
This is something that I've made for
you. I've realized that the direio
audience are strivvers. Whether it's in
business or health, we all have big
goals that we want to accomplish. And
one of the things I've learned is that
when you aim at the big big goal, it can
feel incredibly psychologically
uncomfortable because it's kind of like
being stood at the foot of Mount Everest
and looking upwards. The way to
accomplish your goals is by breaking
them down into tiny small steps. And we
call this in our team the 1%. And
actually this philosophy is highly
responsible for much of our success
here. So what we've done so that you at
home can accomplish any big goal that
you have is we've made these 1% diaries
and we released these last year and they
all sold out. So I asked my team over
and over again to bring the diaries back
but also to introduce some new colors
and to make some minor tweaks to the
diary. So now we have a better range for
you. So, if you have a big goal in mind
and you need a framework and a process
and some motivation, then I highly
recommend you get one of these diaries
before they all sell out once again. And
you can get yours at the diary.com.
And if you want the link, the link is in
the description below.
>> And on that point, one of the things
that really convinced me when I was a uh
when I was going through my little
atheism phase was this this geography
argument, which I'm sure you've heard a
million times. If I'd been born in Saudi
Arabia, I'd probably be a Muslim. If I'd
been born in is India, I'd probably be
Hindu. So it seems like the religion you
believe entirely depends on where you
were born,
>> not on necessarily what is true. And
therefore, if we go back to this point
about hell, I remember thinking at like
19 years old, oh my god, like actually
where you're born is determining whether
you go to this fiery eternal suffering
or not. And that's not fair. So this
must all be not true.
>> Yeah. I mean, I was born in Pakistan. So
I was born in a majority Muslim country
and I'm not a Muslim. Now, you could
argue my parents weren't Muslims, but I
know tons of people who were. My
colleague Steve, who is our Alberta
director at Apologetics Canada. He was
born in Korea and went to a school
setting that was Buddhist.
>> But, but I mean, the numbers are the
numbers like you're like 95% I don't
know what the numbers are, but I know
it's over 90% likely to be the religion
of that territory if you take a on a
religion at all
>> just by where you were born. And that
doesn't fit. I remember thinking very
clearly at 19 years old, this doesn't
feel fair.
>> Sure. as a way to determine who gets
into hell or heaven, which is like my
parents and where they they conceived me
or whatever.
>> Sure. I mean, in one sense, you don't
want fair because fair is you going to
hell. Um, and the gospel message is not
fair, right? So, so the actual gospel
message is not about fairness
because fairness is
I get the just penalty for what I do.
Right? And that's where the whole
concept of mercy and grace are so
they're so central to the Christian
message is Buddhism and Hinduism are
based on fairness
solely based on fairness right the cycle
of samsara of life death birth and
rebirth the karmic cycles that's fair uh
in one sense what god does when he
intervenes in humanity when he
incarnates becomes flesh steps into
humanity and actually experiences pain
and hurt and suffering and death in a
way that makes the God of the Bible
unique and actually experiential to what
you and I go through when we have those
struggles and doubts. He then
takes on the punishment that we deserve.
And the fairness is not actually what is
then given because the fairness is
Wes Huff
getting what he actually deserves for
the weight and the penalty of his cosmic
rebellion
in choosing a life that is is against
and away from God. I'm unclear.
>> Okay.
>> So, if I was if I had Moroccan parents,
my probability of being Muslim is like
99%.
>> Sure.
>> Um, and if I was born in Morocco, that
would that would kind of set me up to go
to hell theoretically.
>> Yes. In so far as you're either you're
taking on your sin.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's the punishment. Or Christ is
taking on your sin and then you are then
covered in his intercession.
>> Okay. But it's not about believing or
not believing.
>> Yeah. Which you explained earlier. Yeah.
Which was which was useful for me
because that that that gave me a new
understanding that I didn't have
previously.
>> Um the other thing I think a lot about
or I thought a lot about was prayer. So
this was really compelling to me when I
was younger, which was, you know, I
would I would hear these stories of
horrific things that had happened in the
world. If you think about what happened
in Nazi Germany and I'd hear that the
people there were, you know, very
religious and praying and it didn't seem
to change the odds of their fate. And
when you look at hospital stats of
Christians versus non-Christians,
generally praying doesn't seem to be
impacting outcome.
>> So therefore, I concluded as like a
19-year-old that maybe prayer doesn't
work and why are people doing it when it
doesn't seem to historically have
worked? What is the what is your
perspective? Does praying work? If if my
child is sick and I start praying, is is
that going to help?
>> I mean, it also kind of begs the
question of what we think prayer is.
Is prayer
incantations
to plate God?
>> What does that mean?
>> Like is God a genie? Right. So I say the
right prayers and uh he gives me what
what I want.
>> Yeah.
>> Um now there are some religious systems
that that is kind of what prayer is is
is you know that's all the agricultural
deities of the ancient near east. like
you you say the right things and you
give the right sacrifices and the the
the hope is that you know the gods would
accept that and then they then you know
in the reciprocal nature of that they
give you good crops. I think prayer in
Christianity is a give and take in that
it's a relational thing. It's God
desiring
to have communication with you. If you
read the psalms, a lot of which are
prayers, uh even, you know, I mentioned
the lament psalms, like it's David or
whoever the psalmist coming to God and
saying, "I don't get it. I'm hurting.
I'm broken. I'm alone. I don't feel
you." There's an aspect of the
relational component of prayer. Now,
prayer is not just that, right? prayer
is, you know, asking is is supplications
is is
committing your desires to God because
you believe that God can actually work
in the universe and do things.
>> And that's kind of what the Bible the
Bible says. It says, "Pour out your
hearts to him. Call him and and call to
me and I will answer you in in
Jeremiah."
>> Mhm.
>> And it also says, "Ask and it will be
given to you in Matthew."
>> Yeah. Seek and you will find. Knock and
the door will be opened unto you. I
mean, part of those is that the the
there's a little bit of a trickiness in
quote mining because the context could
mean prayer. The context could mean, you
know, the the salvific act of God, you
know, uh knock and the door shall be
opened unto you. Like if if you're
actually seeking God and you're doing
that with an open heart and an open
mind, God is going to say, you know,
yes, I'm I'm entering into your life.
I'm doing I'm revealing myself to you.
Now, God can answer yes. God can answer
no. And God can answer weight. Those are
all answers to prayer.
>> Do you think God answers prayers?
>> Yes.
>> And is there a certain type of prayer he
might answer? You know, cuz if I lose my
keys, oh, please, you know, help me find
my keys.
>> I assume he might not answer that one.
But is there a certain type of prayer
you think God answers?
>> I don't think it's I don't think it's a
magical formula.
>> Okay. I I think you know the thing that
we see within Christianity is that is
that prayer is
the a relational aspect like there are
so when when the disciples I mentioned
earlier they asked Jesus how should we
pray and he gives the Lord's prayer in
some ways that's less of a prescription
you know say these words in the right
way because even Jesus says you know
don't babble like the pagans do
>> um but there's an aspect of our father
who art in heaven like a recognition of
who God is. Holy be your name, right?
Your kingdom come. Your will be done on
earth as it is in heaven. Give us this
day our daily bread. Right? There's a,
you know, give us the provision that we
need. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our our trespasses, our
sins as we forgive those who sin against
us. That's an interesting one because
we're asking God to forgive us like we
forgive others, which can be dangerous
sometimes, right? Maybe I don't want to
pray that all the time. For yours is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory
forever and ever. Amen. So, in some
ways, is that God telling us is that
Jesus telling us how to pray exactly? I
don't think that's not a part of it. But
I also think that, you know, there's an
aspect of it. Recognize who God is.
Recognize who you are. Uh, you know, do
ask for provision. Do ask for things
that you need and you even that you
want. And you know recognize that we
want this reality as earth on earth as
it is in heaven. You know, there's
components of what Jesus is saying in
that go beyond simply like a wrote
prayer in some kind of incantation or
you know list of you say the the right
things in the right way and you know
then God is going to you know that
that's what ancient Greco Roman paganism
was like and prayer even if you aren't
religious has a basis in neuroscience
that says it's really good for our
well-being. Neuroscience research shows
that prayer activates brain networks for
attention, emotional regulation, and
social connection while reducing stress.
And when they do brain ECG scans, they
find people are more calm and focused
when they're in states of prayer, and
they have greater resilience over time,
which is, I mean, reason enough to have
some form of active prayer.
>> Regardless of that, I I'm really
interested in how you think about
everything that's going on with
technology at the moment.
>> We're living in a very interesting time.
It's kind of like we're trying to summon
the gods ourself. We're we're creating
this form of intelligence that, you
know, people are developing a
relationship with and are speaking to
every day and we've made it on silicon
chips and using these things called GPUs
and it's called artificial intelligence.
Are you concerned
>> by the direction of travel in this
direction
>> that we're now seeking guidance and
comfort and all of these things from AI
instead of this book in front of us? Hm.
I think there's aspects where I have
concerns. I mean, my my colleagues um
Andy Stiger and Steve Kim uh are are
more invested in these questions, I
think, than I am. My my uh colleague
Andy, he did his PhD at Aberdine in the
question of philosophical anthropology.
What does it mean to be human? And he he
investigated a lot into the questions of
things like AI. and my colleague Steve
is kind of looking into things that
relate to transhumanism. So, I mean,
these are these are relevant questions
to who we are. I'm not convinced that
the intelligence part of AI outweighs
the artificial. I don't see AI thinking.
I see there being an aspect of the
coding that AI will regurgitate, but I
don't I'm not convinced that AI will
ever say become conscious. I think it
will fake the touring test in that it
will kind of attempt to convince us that
it is cogn cognizant of its own
existence, but I I don't I don't know if
that's actually possible. And I think
there's something about the innateness
of of consciousness
that we don't really know, right? We
don't really know what consciousness is.
There's all sorts of weird explanations
of why like is your brain your who you
are? Not really, right? It's not not we
don't really have I think entirely
sufficient answers to these questions.
But at the exact same time, I think it
makes sense that if we are created in
God's image, there's an aspect of we
want to create in our image.
>> And there's going to be that outpouring
of the creation of something new and
amazing and advancing in our
understanding and knowledge. This is
kind of sets people up for this whole
simulation theory argument where they
say that if you imagine any rate of
improvement on our current reality,
>> people are already making virtual
reality worlds. If you can go on so many
different programs now and type in, I
want to go to the top of Mount Everest
and there's a village there. And then
you can experience that in three
dimensions. You can put on a headset and
go to the top of Mount Everest and
there's this rendered village there. M
>> if you imagine any rate of improvement
even 1% a year in this technology
>> eventually whether it's in 500 years or
10,000 years you get to a point where
it's almost indistinguishable from this
experience that mean you are having
today in the real world and so the
simulation theory posits
>> that again you just think about how long
technology's been here it's like 50
years ago we didn't have computers like
this we didn't even have like the iPhone
or phones that's just 50 years
>> imagine billions of years and a rate of
improvement you get to something
indistinguishable from this. And it's
conceivable that me and you with
computers will run simulations. We'll
make things like The Sims and video
games and GTA 6, although that's taking
forever. And with an improvement of
technology, at any rate, those worlds
will feel real theoretically to the
characters within them.
>> So, simulation theory posits that
actually this is what our lives are.
There was an a civilization at some
point in the cosmic universe that got to
that point of technological
sophistication. They ran a bunch of
different simulations on a computer or
whatever their technology was. And this
is one such world we're living in right
now.
>> And that is actually our god. It could
be some four-year-old alien that had a
laptop,
>> right?
>> 10 gazillion years ago. And the big bang
was the day that he started the
simulation.
>> Yeah. Almost like it was intelligently
designed, right?
>> Yeah. Like actually this is like this is
I I think there probably is some kind of
god. I just don't know what what it is.
>> Sure.
>> So, I don't know whether it's the one in
in the book that you have in front of me
here, whether it's the one that they
believe in the Muslim religion or
whether it's like a 4-year-old kid on
his laptop that was messing around in a
technologically sophisticated universe
10 billion years ago,
>> right?
>> But I think there's something bigger
than I am,
>> right? And I think, you know, the the
simulation theory I don't think really
solves the issue because it just kind of
punts the can down the road in that it
still avoids the question of what what
is that? How did we get here? And what
is the ultimate explanation for
everything? So probabilistically is in
the world around us in what we see with
like our relational characteristics and
everything is it possible that we live
in a simulation? I think it yes it is. I
think probabilistically though with how
the description of creation and the
human condition and what we see within
history. I think personally the God of
the Bible is the most reasonable
explanation especially when we're
comparing it to other religious
worldviews. I think the simulation
theory is an interesting one or you know
the string theory multiple universes. I
just think that those are almost like
we're walking around the question. we're
circling around the question and it's
not actually answering. We still need a
god.
>> Yeah. And then, you know, even in the
example I gave with a four-year-old
messing around in his laptop 10 billion
years ago in a technologically advanced
civilization. I then my brain a few
seconds later asked, well, what was the
point of his life?
>> Yeah. And who created him?
>> And I could say the same about God, I
guess, like the God of the Christian
Bible. Like who why is this God? Like
who created this God? Did someone create
this God or is this just has he always
been there?
>> Right? I mean, philosophically, it's a
category error because all things that
are have a beginning have a creator. And
philosophically, the God of the Bible is
an entity that ontologically didn't have
a beginning. So, if we're talking about
an unmoved mover, right, in the kind of
arisatilian
categories of of philosophy, God didn't
have a creator because God is the author
of creation.
>> Okay? It's kind of like asking what does
blue smell like?
>> And God I should think of as like a you
know in the Bible in these well not in
the Bible but in depictions of God it's
like a guy with a beard.
>> Yeah. No.
>> Or it's like some like mystical force
that's kind of like a a white light,
>> right? No. I I think I mean those are
attempts probably inadequately to
express aspects of how we would visually
communicate who God is. I think that
probably misses the mark more than it
actually gets at what you know what and
who God is. I don't know if there's a
there's a proper way that could give a
physical attribution description of God
other than Jesus who is God incarnate,
right? Could you think of a a more
powerful a more amazing example of of a
God than one who actually enters into
his creation?
I don't know. My fiance says that God is
love.
>> Yeah,
>> she says that a lot. My fiance tends to
be right as well.
>> Nice.
>> So, I I tend to in the first time she
says something that I don't believe, I
tend to assume it's not true for a
while, but then it tends to be proven to
be true within a year. So, when she said
to me that God is love, I really thought
deeply about it. I thought maybe she's
right. Maybe love is God.
>> I mean, that's from the Bible. God is
love. The thing grammatically that's
interesting about that when John writes
that in his epistle is grammatically in
the Greek it's phrased in a way that God
is love but love is not God right so you
can't deify the
what love is
when I you know when you love your
fiance that isn't God that's like an
inefficient
description of what we know God to be so
God is love but love is not God. And in
that sense, going back to what I was
saying said a few times now, you know
what what the Bible is saying when it
says God is love is that that is the
ultimate character of who God is in that
love is this highest value. It is that
which we you know hold as the example
ethic of what we want. We want to be
loved, right? To be loved and not known
is
very insufficient.
And to be known but not loved is what we
all fear. But I think what we find in
the Bible is a God who both loves and
knows us. And I think that's where the
God who is love, who creates us and
calls us to love him with all of our
soul, all of our mind, all of our
strength, that properly kind of fulfills
what I think we mean when we say God is
love.
>> There is a a deep crisis of meaning in
the world, especially in you know the
western world. Three in five American
adults between 18 and 25 years old said
that their life lacked meaning and
purpose with 50% of the same group
saying their poor mental health was
linked to not knowing what to do with my
life.
>> And a lack of purpose is significantly
associated with many of the mental
health illnesses like depression and
anxiety. And as of April 2025, the
overall prevalence of depression in US
teenagers and adults has increased by
60% over the last decade according to
the C CDC. And tragically, globally,
more than almost a million people die
due to suicide every year. And it's the
third leading cause of death among 15 to
29 year olds according to the World
Health Organization.
What are we getting wrong?
I think we're looking for our purpose
and our meaning and things that are
ultimately not going to give the value
that those things actually require.
So it's not a matter of if we worship
it's a matter of what we worship and
worship if worship is, you know, giving
our all to something.
I think there's a lot of things within
society that are going to tell us that
our identity is going to be fulfilled in
money or it's going to be fulfilled in
relationships or accolades or all of
these aspects are ultimately going to
fall short in giving us actual purpose
and meaning and if they're not grounded
in actually giving us value. Right? Your
friend is a as far as I understand is a
good example of that. Right? You know,
we can achieve all of these things. You
hear athletes and actors and famous
people talk about all the wealth, all
the like celebrity status they could
possibly desire and being completely
empty, being completely
fulfilled.
And I think that's because
we're we're chasing after
things that aren't going to give us what
we actually need, right? They're
faximiles and cheap reproductions of
what actually can give give us meaning
and purpose. And that's because we are
created to be in relationship with our
God. And that is where we will find our
true identity. That's what's going to
give us the motivation to actually get
up in the morning like your friend you
saying you know you couldn't get up in
the morning
he finds not just a motivational value
in the Christian faith he finds actually
meaning and purpose in the Christian
faith that getting up in the morning has
a purpose that goes beyond the here and
the now and that can affect all of the
people around him and now he can pursue
his entrepreneurial activities or his
relationships or even his finances for
the glory of God. And then that gives it
an ontological meaning that goes beyond
the simple basics of kind of what
secular materialism has to offer.
>> Young men in particular are struggling
in their own unique ways.
>> And is is that in part in your view
because they are worshiping the wrong
role models in life?
>> I think it could be. I think men often
find we find our identity in the things
that we do right well we we hear about
this in that unfortunately we've bought
the lie that we are the sum of our
actions this is why when people lose
their jobs when they get let go of their
careers they have identity crisises
because if we believe that we are the
sum of our actions we can put a lot of
stock in something that is ultimately
going to lead us like empty um same
thing with relationships Right? You
watch any romcom, what is it almost
always about? Lonely guy, lonely girl.
They meet each other. They fall in love.
At the end, everything works out. And
now, now their identity is fulfilled.
Well, I mean, all you have to do is to
get married to know that that's not
going to fulfill every desire and need
you have, right? I love my wife. I love
my marriage. It's one of the best things
that I've ever done. But if I put all of
my eggs in that basket,
it it's it could very well and almost
certainly will lead me astray,
especially if that falls apart,
especially when there are times of
hardship and struggle. So, I think you
are more than the sum of your actions
because you have value that goes beyond
that. And it's actually living out that
value that can give you the meaning and
the purpose you're finding. But men in
particular, we find value in what we do.
I think women although I don't want to
speak you know too broadly I think
speaking in generalities
women find a lot of identity in
relational values
in the relationships that they have with
their friends or their significant
others. Men often find
value in like what they're able to
contribute to physically.
And so
especially in a world where
you know economic crisis is a thing or
work complications with with things like
technology removing a lot of
occupations. I I think that can be a gen
genuine hardship.
>> Yeah. I was just looking at the some
research on PubMed and it says exactly
that. says, "In a recent qualitative
analysis in the United States of suicide
notes, majority male sample, the authors
identified themes that differed by
gender, yeah, such as men more often
referring to financial hardship, etc.,
>> which can imply feelings of failure and
worthlessness tied to traditional roles.
In contrast, women's notes were more
about lowered selfworth and
interpersonal relationships."
>> Mhm. So if that does hold and and we're
implying there that sometimes it's to do
with a feeling of worthlessness for men,
>> are you saying that Christianity can
provide something that is an antidote to
that feeling?
>> I think not only can it provide an
antidote, it can provide the antidote.
>> What would you say to anyone that's
listening right now that feels a little
bit lost in their life? I would say that
you have purpose and you have meaning
more than what society tells you
is going to give you that meaning and
purpose and that there's a God who loves
you and he loves you so much that he
stepped out of eternity and into
humanity and he lived the perfect life
that you couldn't in order to establish
and create the union of the
relationship. ship with God that you're
actually seeking.
>> And what would you tell them step one
would be to go in that direction?
>> Well, I would say, you know, push into
something like read the Bible. I would
say open the Gospel of Matthew, open the
Gospel of John and and start reading and
find out who this Jesus guy is. You
know, investigate that question, why
that is significant, why that matters.
Because the person and character of
Jesus goes beyond simply
an historical character. I think Jesus
was a genuine historical character. He's
no less than that. But he's also so much
more than that. And in discovering who
he is in relation to who you are, that's
going to change your life.
>> Are you noticing that people are asking
you
certain questions about Christianity or
religion or any of the adjacent subjects
more now than they were 10 years ago?
like are there certain themes or topics
that are more front of mind for people
these days?
>> Yeah, I think we've we've gone through a
shift where when I kind of started in
this endeavor of what I'm doing now,
this kind of crescendoed in the last uh
year and a bit. Um when I started out, I
think people are asking a lot more is
God real and is this true? And I think
now people are asking is God good? And I
think it's because it's part and parcel
to this meaning crisis thing. I also
think that there have been some major
moral issues. I mean the whole Epstein
thing right now I think is a testament
to that. We are seeing examples of true
evil and I think that bothers people and
in a world where we can rationalize
subjectivizing evil we understand that
is heinous and if that is evil with a
capital E
where's the G the good with a capital G?
you know, C. Lewis, who I've quoted a
few times, he said uh in his um the
problem of pain and suffering in that
book that he wrote that uh one of his
objections to God was that there was
there was so much evil and chaos in this
world. He said, "But what was I
comparing that to? A man does not call a
line crooked unless he knows what a
straight line looks like." Right? The
reason you understand that there's rot
is because you understand what something
that's healthy is. And so there's an
objective
standard that needs to be weighed by
these things. And I think more than
ever, we're seeing things that really
speak to
the justice questions in terms of the
meaning questions. And that
has really interested me as someone who
is I'm a historian, right? So I'm
interested in the questions about I do
things like read Greek and Coptic most
of the time, right? But I've been
challenged to think more about the
philosophical questions because I think
we live in an age where I'm really
encouraged by people looking at
injustice. There's a lump in our throat
and I think there's a lump in our throat
because Jesus put it there.
>> I think um AI is going to have a big
impact on your work.
>> Yeah.
>> And in ways that might not be super
obvious. I think one of the ways is that
if all these CEOs are true when they say
that AI is going to cause massive job
displacement and even the CEOs that are
building the technology have sat here
and told me that there's going to be
massive job displacement there's going
to be a crisis of meaning people get
huge amount of work from the things that
they do in their lives and they're not
going to be able to do those things in
the same way necessarily and about 60%
of Americans say they're they're worried
that AI will take away the thing that
gives them their meaning. Well, I think
we're just at the footsteps of the mean
crisis of meaning in this regard.
>> Yeah. And that's going to mean that a
lot of people, you know, are going to
struggle a lot. And that concerns me.
>> I mean, I think that's what I'm more
worried about with AI. I'm not worried
about AI taking over the world. I I'm
not worried about, you know, um AI
replacing us or something like that. Uh
if I'm worried about AI, it's that it's
the the pain and suffering that it can
cause for people who have bought into
the lie that the sum of their identity
is in what they can contribute and do
and how the Christian worldview speaks
into that. How can I think Christianly
about a society where there could very
well be
mass identity crises because of
unemployment or because you know the
years ago we were telling truck drivers
learn to code.
>> Well now coders are being replaced by AI
systems right AI can code better than
the coders. So
>> Spotify said yesterday they none of
their engineers have written a line of
code since December. And I thought,
"Wow, hell." Like that's Yeah.
>> And my car drives itself here in uh in
America. I sat here with the other day
with the CEO of Uber and he said to me,
"They have 9 million drivers careers and
within x number of years they will have
none."
>> He said the unique thing is the the
speed of the the change is going to
cause the problems because we had the
industrial revolution. We had time to
you know transfer to other lines of
employment etc. But the speed in which
there's going to be a displacement is um
is going to cause the issues. And I
wonder what's going to happen. I mean, a
lot of people are, you know, they're
going to be in search of meaning. And I
guess that'll that will push some people
towards Christianity and other
religions, but not everybody. Cuz you
said, you know, as you say, when our
identities are pulled away from us in
such a way, some people turn to the
bottle,
>> right?
>> Or um you know, causes mental health
situations.
I mean, humanity has a very unique knack
to pivot
>> and figure things out. Now, is there
going to be uh you know a a l period in
between when that job crisis happens?
Maybe. But, uh I think I think humanity
will figure things out. But I just I
just don't know if that will be before
all of you know it hits the fan.
>> What was the first domino that fell for
you that made you go on this this
journey of becoming an is it the term
Christian apologist?
>> Yeah.
>> Becoming a what does that even mean?
Christian apologist.
>> So I mentioned 1 Peter 3:15 right? But
in your heart Christ is Lord always be
prepared to give an answer. So that is
that apologia. So we take the Greek word
apologia and we stick an English suffix
on the end and we have this field to
study this discipline apologetics.
>> What does that mean? You're you're
explaining the Bible,
>> giving reasons. Yeah. Giving answers. So
apologetics is as complicated as uh
arguments philosophically and
scientifically for the existence of God
and the historical reliability of the
Bible. And as simple as if someone asked
me why Jesus, that's an apologetic
question in so far as it's giving an
answer.
>> I was looking at some of these photos of
you as a young man. I wondered how much
the situation in these photos had an
impact on who you came to be and what
you came to believe. I'll put these
photos on the screen for anybody.
>> Yeah.
>> But um this is a a young boy in a
wheelchair.
>> Yep.
>> And in a hospital bed that looks to be
paralyzed.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah. When I was 11 years old, I was
diagnosed with a rare neurological
condition that left me paralyzed from
the waist down.
>> So you at 10, you were fine. You were
normal.
>> Yeah. And at 11, suddenly you were
paralyzed from the waist down.
>> Yes. So I had the flu and my body's
immune system instead of attacking the
flu attacked the nerve endings at the
base of my spinal cord. So the myelin
sheath and caused inflammation cutting
off the communication from my brain to
my legs.
>> And a lot of people that get that
disease never walk again.
>> It's complicated. Uh so the so is it
called acute transverse myelitis?
Although I've been told recently that
there's a change in the name of the the
diagnosis, but essentially transverse
myitis is not all that rare. But acute
that acute in in terms of the like
quickness of it, I had fallen asleep a
nap for probably no more than 30 minutes
and when I woke up I was paralyzed. So
it was the the quickness of the actual
damage that was done to my spinal cord
that was the catalyst for in the
diagnosis saying that the chances of me
walking again were were very low
>> but within a month you were walking
again.
>> Yeah. 1 month to the day. So in fact the
anniversary 23 year anniversary was
recently cuz it was in February 8th. Um
I woke up on a Saturday morning got out
of bed and walked over to my wheelchair.
Did this change your perspective on God,
Christianity, religion?
>> It did in some ways. I mean, I don't I
don't know how it couldn't. Uh, it
definitely to have medical professionals
tell me
you're probably going to be a paraplegic
for the rest of your life. Like, this is
what you need to kind of accept and and
get used to to the exact same medical
professionals, you know, the um
pediatric neurologists saying we don't
know why you're walking.
that had to have an impact on me in that
I think I I truly believe I was healed
in that it was the doctors who used the
word miracle because they said that they
they couldn't medically explain why
there was no more damage on my spinal
cord, why I was walking with like not
even any like atrophy or anything.
However, I still needed to figure some
of the more intellectual questions out
of my head when I was a teenager. So, it
wasn't just that this happened and
explained a lot because I was open to
the possibility of this being a fluke of
there being a completely randomness to
this.
>> Mhm. And so when I was a teenager, I
investigated a lot, you know, to the
best of my ability as a 17-year-old in
trying to answer some of the more
meaning questions about I know what my
parents raised me to believe, but if I
believe it simply because they told me
to, it's not the worst
reason, but it's also not the best
reason. So that's is the first time that
I uh read the Quran cover to cover. I
was looking into things like the Book of
Mormon and the Bakabita. I was just
curious. That's when you know reading
Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris, Daniel
Dennett, not in any type of crisis,
faith crisis way, but I was I was
investigating.
>> So you believe in the supernatural?
>> Mhm.
>> Do you believe that we can speak to the
dead?
>> No.
>> You don't believe that?
>> So when people
>> Well, I should I should preface that. It
depends what you mean by speaking to the
dead. I think it's I think it's
possible. We have examples of it in the
Bible. Um,
Saul gets a medium to call up the spirit
of Samuel.
>> So, do you believe mediums are telling
the truth when they say that they're
contacting people in the afterlife? I
think that there's a possibility of
engaging the supernatural world, which
is dangerous. And I think there's a very
fuzzy line between mediums who are con
artists and people who are act engaged
in something that is dabbling in the
supernatural.
>> I say this in part because I I've heard
people say that, you know, their
partner's passed away and then they've
seen signs, their partner has left them
signs. Hm.
>> Do do you believe in this kind of thing?
>> I don't think so. Not in those ways. I I
think when people are dead, they're
dead. Um, but I think there are aspects
of the supernatural world and a world
that's going on behind the scenes that's
articulated within scripture that have
an impact on this world in a way that if
people can be distracted and misled to
think that they are contacting dead
relatives, then that is otherwise going
to uh prevent them from pursuing what
they should be as image bearsers of God.
So you think it's demonic in some some
capacity?
>> I think it can be. I don't think it's
always. I think in emotionally
vulnerable states, we are willing to
adhere to all sorts of things.
>> Mhm.
>> And there's a um there's a sensitivity
that I want to communicate around that.
>> Mh. Because I think people especially in
the in the periods of the deaths of
loved ones often want to look for
validation in their passed away loved
ones leaving something or communicating
or
>> and also that we all want to believe
when we lose people we love that they
are somewhere better that they are in a
good place and this is one of the the
things that I struggled with earlier
when we were talking about hell which is
if such a small percentage of people are
making it to hell by whatever measure of
acceptance one believes, then that would
mean that like my grandmother who wasn't
necessarily a devout religious person or
a Christian or she hadn't repented is
currently in hell. And that's a hard
thought to take that she is in such a
awful place now.
>> Yeah. And this will this this would
obviously make people not want to
experience that dissonance and therefore
reject religion and say, "Well, no, my
if I accept the Bible, then I have to
accept my grandmother's currently
burning in hell,
>> right?
>> And so I'm going to reject the Bible.
It's much easier than accepting that my
grandmother's suffering right now,
>> right? I mean, ultimately that's a um I
I wouldn't do it that way. Therefore,
it's not true."
>> Sorry. What you mean? Well, I don't
think that God should send my
grandmother to hell.
>> Yeah.
>> Therefore, I'm going to conclude that
it's not true based on that type of Now,
at the end of the day,
does God communicate with people in ways
that go beyond my understanding? I've
talked to enough Muslims in the Muslim
world who've had dreams about Jesus to
know that something goes on. like I
don't understand sometimes what what
happens on the deathbed between an
individual and their maker. So it's not
my place to say that they are burning in
hell or whatever you know descriptive
language you want to use
>> cuz I it's that's between them and God
at the exact same time apart from the
saving work of Christ I'm going to hell.
So, and I I genuinely believe that is
that apart from the inbreaking of God
into my life in part and parcel by
things like this, but also by like
showing me and allowing me to
investigate these things and wrestle
through questions and putting people in
places in my life that have formed me
and shaped me and allowed me to look at
the evidence and have conversations and
be honest and transparent. And those are
the things that have led me down a road
to say, you know, I'm convinced. I'm
convinced that this is true
experientially, that it is
intellectually
robust, and that it is experientially
profound
for me and for so many other people,
your friend included.
>> What's the most important thing that we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about, Wesley? For the people
that are listening, you know, I would
assume they're very curious people. Some
of them are religious, some of them
aren't. What is the most important thing
that we should close on in your view?
>> Part of my academic study is that I do
what's called paparology and
paleography. So I make faximiles of
manuscripts, ancient manuscripts, um
particularly biblical manuscripts. So
this is a biblical manuscript, right?
P46.
It's a late second or third century page
from a collection of Paul's epistles. So
>> Paul from the Bible.
>> Paul from the Bible. He wrote this.
>> Well, so he wrote that and then a scribe
in the second century copied it down. So
this is I made this. So this is genuine
papyrus. I'm only wrote on one side so
you could see kind of how the papyrus is
put together. And then I got you a I got
you a nice Bible.
>> Oh,
>> but I have put a bookmark in the page
where that passage is.
>> Why why did you pick that particular
passage?
>> Well, why don't you open it up and read
it? So it's it's on the little
inscription note that I have there. uh
Romans 12. So you can see on the bottom
there that there's the title.
>> Oh yeah. 12 112.
>> So it says, "Rejoice in hope. Be patient
in tribulation. Be constant in prayer.
Contribute to the needs of the saints
and seek to show hospitality. Bless
those who persecute you. Bless and do
not curse them. Rejoice with those who
rejoice. Weep with those who weep. Live
in harmony with one another. Do not be
haughty, but associate with the lowly.
Never be wise in your own sight. Repay
no one evil for evil, but give thought
to do what is honorable in the sight of
all. If possible, so far as it depends
on you, live peacefully with all.
Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but
leave it to the wrath of God. For it is
written, "Vengeance is mine. I will
repay, says the Lord. To the contrary,
if your enemy is hungry, feed him. If he
is thirsty, give him something to drink.
For by so doing, you will heat burning
coals on his head. Do not be overcome by
evil, but overcome evil with good.
>> So hopefully that's a good passage to
>> beautiful
>> remember, think about, and then that's
the box for it.
>> Thank you so much. This is so beautiful.
Wesley, we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next not knowing who
they're leaving it for. And the question
left for you is, "What is one risk that
you should be taking in your life but
aren't currently?" where I am in my
life, I feel like so many things have
happened so quickly that there's like an
aspect of unpredictability and I I'm
just a little bit My wife and I were
talking last night and it was like we
need to embrace what's happening right
now, but from a year from now if it's
all gone that's totally okay.
>> Mhm. and and and we're fine with that
whether that's you know financially or
with social media or or opportunity or
and maybe the risk is pushing into that
and and and saying like you know maybe
there's an aspect of that yes I think
it's wise to keep that in calibration
and understand that if this goes away
tomorrow I'm content because this is
beyond what I have I'm in a room sitting
with Steven Bartlett
>> I'm in a room sat with So there's an
there's an aspect of that which is is
completely mind-blowing to me,
especially Wes Huff from a year ago.
But maybe not selling myself short and
thinking that, you know, these
opportunities are opportunities to
invest in others in ways that people
have invested in me over this last year.
>> What do you mean by that? You mean
>> with some of the things that I've I've
been very uh graciously able to
experience and in giving other people
opportunity to maybe push into trying to
make an impact in their space.
>> Oh, okay.
>> And encouraging them,
>> pulling people up the ladder
>> that you've been able to climb.
>> Yeah.
>> Paying it forward to or paying it
downward, I guess.
>> Yeah.
>> This is so so cool. Well, I'm I'm very
thankful for you willing to have me on.
So, thank you for
>> No, thank you. You're such a great
communicator and um you're so finely
balanced in in your ability to deeply
understand everything you're talking
about from a historical perspective to
be in the pursuit of truth as you kind
of said irrespective of where that one
might lead somebody but then you have
the gift of yeah the gift of
communication incredibly engaging person
good intentions good man so I was very
very you know very very glad we had this
conversation and very much looking
forward to it for a very long time so
I'm glad you said yes I was asking my
team for maybe I don't know maybe nine
months to to get in contact with you.
>> Well, I apologize cuz I hit no a few
times.
>> No, it's okay. It's okay. But um I'm
really really appreciative of it,
Wesley, and I hope to have this
conversation again sometime soon.
>> Yeah, that'd be great.
>> Thank you. YouTube have this new crazy
algorithm where they know exactly what
video you would like to watch next based
on AI and all of your viewing behavior.
And the algorithm says that this video
is the perfect video for you. It's
different for everybody looking right
now. Check this video out and I bet you
you might love it.